--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Based Medical Delivery with
Temporal Logic Constraints and Convex Feasible Set Collision
Avoidance
Kaiyuan Chena, Yuhan Suob, Shaowei Cuib, Yuanqing Xiab, Wannian Liangc,∗and
Shuo Wanga,∗
aState Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
bVanke School of Public Health, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
cSchool of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
globalTrajectory optimization
temporal logic constraints
convex programming
unmanned aerial vehicles
A B S T R A C T
This paper addresses the problem of trajectory optimization for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs)
performing time-sensitive medical deliveries in urban environments. Specifically, we consider
a single UAV with 3-degree-of-freedom dynamics tasked with delivering blood packages to
multiple hospitals, each with a predefined time window and priority. Mission objectives are
encoded using Signal Temporal Logic (STL), enabling the formal specification of spatial-
temporal constraints. To ensure safety, city buildings are modeled as 3D convex obstacles, and
obstacle avoidance is handled through a Convex Feasible Set (CFS) method. The entire planning
problem—combining UAV dynamics, STL satisfaction, and collision avoidance—is formulated
as a convex optimization problem that ensures tractability and can be solved efficiently using
standard convex programming techniques. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed
method generates dynamically feasible, collision-free trajectories that satisfy temporal mission
goals, providing a scalable and reliable approach for autonomous UAV-based medical logistics.
1. Introduction
Unmanned aerial vehicles are emerging as a transformative solution for rapid and reliable medical logistics,
especially in emergency scenarios where timely delivery of critical supplies—such as blood, vaccines, or organs—can
directly impact patient outcomes. Traditional ground transportation is often limited by traffic congestion, geographic
barriers, or disaster-related disruptions. In contrast, UAVs offer the ability to bypass such constraints, enabling swift
point-to-point delivery in both urban and rural settings. The potential for autonomous aerial systems to support
healthcare infrastructure is particularly promising in time-critical missions such as blood transfusion logistics, where
every minute counts (Bauer, Moormann, Strametz and Groneberg, 2021). By optimizing their navigation and delivery
efficiency, UAVs can serve as a crucial component in future smart healthcare systems.
Despite their promise, deploying UAVs in dense urban environments presents significant challenges. First, UAV
trajectories must respect the underlying vehicle dynamics, including acceleration, velocity, and turning limitations, to
ensure feasibility and controllability in real-time flight. Second, urban settings are filled with static obstacles such as
buildings, posing serious safety risks if not properly modeled and avoided (Kuang and Liu, 2024). Third, the mission
objectives are often not limited to reaching a single location but require the UAV to visit multiple destinations—each
with individual priorities and strict time windows (Foehn, Romero and Scaramuzza, 2021; Romero, Sun, Foehn and
Scaramuzza, 2022). Finally, trajectory planning must reconcile these spatial and temporal requirements with safety
constraints, all while remaining computationally tractable for online or near-real-time deployment. Addressing these
challenges calls for a planning framework that integrates high-level task specification with low-level dynamic and
environmental constraints (Szmuk, Malyuta, Reynolds, Mceowen and Açikmeşe, 2019).
Early approaches to UAV trajectory planning have primarily focused on geometric or graph-based methods, such
as A* search, rapidly-exploring random tree, and their numerous variants (Funk, Tarrio, Papatheodorou, Alcantarilla
∗Corresponding author
liangwn@ tsinghua.edu.cn (W. Liang); shuo.wang@ia.ac.cn (S. Wang)
ORCID(s):
Chen et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 11
arXiv:2506.06038v2  [eess.SY]  26 Aug 2025

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Based Medical Delivery
and Leutenegger, 2023; Aggarwal and Kumar, 2020). These methods are effective in generating collision-free paths
in static environments but often neglect dynamic feasibility, control limits, or time-critical objectives. Moreover, they
typically rely on post-processing to smooth or adapt the path, which may violate safety or dynamic constraints when
applied directly to real vehicles (Funk et al., 2023).
To address the limitations of purely geometric planning, optimal control and trajectory optimization methods have
been introduced. These approaches formulate trajectory generation as a continuous optimization problem, incorporat-
ing system dynamics and control constraints directly into the planning process (Chen, Cheng and Hovakimyan, 2023;
Morrell, Thakker, Merewether, Reid, Rigter, Tzanetos and Chamitoff, 2018; Betts, 2010). While powerful, they often
require carefully tuned cost functions and may struggle to represent complex high-level tasks such as sequential visits
or deadline-based deliveries (Morrell et al., 2018).
More recently, temporal logic frameworks, especially signal temporal logic, have been adopted to encode complex
task specifications in a formal and interpretable manner (Gilpin, Kurtz and Lin, 2021; Belta and Sadraddini, 2019).
STL enables the expression of spatial-temporal goals such as “reach a region within a certain time window,” making
it suitable for high-level mission planning. However, directly incorporating STL constraints into optimization often
leads to non-convex or mixed-integer formulations (Buyukkocak, Aksaray and Yazıcıoğlu, 2021), which can be
computationally expensive and difficult to scale, especially in real-time applications.
To mitigate these challenges, recent research has explored convex relaxations and smooth approximations
of STL semantics (Buyukkocak and Aksaray, 2025; Gilpin et al., 2021). By reformulating STL conditions using
auxiliary variables and convex functions, it becomes possible to embed temporal logic specifications into a continuous
optimization framework without sacrificing tractability. Nevertheless, integrating such methods with realistic dynamics
and obstacle avoidance in three-dimensional urban settings remains an open challenge, particularly when multiple
delivery targets and time-sensitive constraints are involved.
While prior works have advanced individual aspects of UAV path planning—such as geometric routing, trajectory
optimization, or temporal logic-based task encoding—few have addressed the full integration of high-level temporal
specifications, low-level vehicle dynamics, and obstacle-rich environments within a unified, tractable framework. Most
approaches either simplify the environment to two dimensions (Buyukkocak and Aksaray, 2025; Gundana and Kress-
Gazit, 2021), assume unconstrained dynamics (Buyukkocak et al., 2021; Chen, Cai, Zhou, Li and Kan, 2025), or rely
on computationally expensive non-convex formulations that are unsuitable for real-time applications (Zhang and Liu,
2022). In contrast, our work bridges the gap between formal mission specification and practical trajectory generation
by combining temporal logic, convex obstacle avoidance, and physically consistent UAV motion planning in three-
dimensional urban space.
This paper presents a trajectory optimization framework tailored for UAV-based blood delivery missions under
temporal and environmental constraints. The main contributions of this work are as follows:
1. We propose an STL-based formulation of multi-goal medical delivery tasks, allowing each hospital visit to be
precisely specified with spatial and temporal bounds.
2. Obstacle avoidance is addressed using the convex feasible set method, which iteratively constructs linearized
safe regions around a reference trajectory, enabling scalable and collision-free path planning in complex 3D
environments.
3. The entire planning problem—including STL satisfaction, obstacle avoidance, and UAV dynamics—is for-
mulated as a standard convex optimization problem. This convex structure ensures computational tractability
and allows the problem to be efficiently solved using off-the-shelf convex programming techniques (Malyuta,
Reynolds, Szmuk, Lew, Bonalli, Pavone and Açıkmeşe, 2022).
Together, these components form a unified and implementable solution for time-sensitive UAV mission planning,
with demonstrated feasibility and robustness in simulated urban environments.
Notation: We denote by ℤ[𝑎,𝑏] the set of all integers in the closed interval [𝑎, 𝑏], where 𝑎, 𝑏∈ℝand 𝑎≤𝑏.
2. Problem Formulation
2.1. System model
We consider a UAV operating in a three-dimensional urban environment. The UAV is modeled as a discrete-time
system with 3-degree-of-freedom kinematics and control inputs, evolving over a fixed planning horizon of 𝑇time
Chen et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 11

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Based Medical Delivery
steps with a uniform time step Δ𝑡. Let 𝐱𝑡= [𝑥𝑡, 𝑦𝑡, 𝑧𝑡]⊤∈ℝ3 denote the position of the UAV at time step 𝑡, and let
𝐯𝑡= [𝑣𝑥
𝑡, 𝑣𝑦
𝑡, 𝑣𝑧
𝑡]⊤represent its velocity components along each axis.
The discrete-time kinematic model of the UAV is given by:
𝐱𝑡+1 = 𝐱𝑡+ 𝐯𝑡Δ𝑡𝐯𝑡+1 = 𝐯𝑡+ 𝐚𝑡Δ𝑡
(1)
where 𝐚𝑡= [𝑎𝑥
𝑡, 𝑎𝑦
𝑡, 𝑎𝑧
𝑡]⊤∈ℝ3 is the acceleration input applied at time step 𝑡.
To ensure dynamic feasibility, the UAV is subject to constraints on its speed and acceleration:
‖[𝑣𝑥
𝑡, 𝑣𝑦
𝑡]⊤‖2 ≤𝑣max,
∀𝑡∈ℤ[1,𝑇]|𝑎𝑥
𝑡| ≤𝑎max,
|𝑎𝑦
𝑡| ≤𝑎max,
|𝑎𝑧
𝑡| ≤𝑎max,
∀𝑡∈ℤ[1,𝑇−1]
(2)
where 𝑣max, 𝑎max are user-defined upper bounds on the UAV’s planar speed and acceleration magnitude, respectively.
The initial position and velocity of the UAV are assumed to be known and fixed:
𝐱1 = 𝐱init,
𝐯1 = 𝟎
2.2. Task Specification and STL Encoding
The UAV is tasked with delivering medical supplies—such as blood or plasma units—to a set of geographically
distributed hospitals within a fixed planning horizon. Let {𝐡1, 𝐡2, … , 𝐡𝐾} denote the set of hospital locations in 3D
space, where each 𝐡𝑘∈ℝ3 is a target delivery waypoint. Each hospital 𝐡𝑘is associated with a temporal delivery
window [𝜏start
𝑘
, 𝜏end
𝑘] ⊆[1, 𝑇], during which the UAV must arrive sufficiently close to the destination.
The mission objective is to visit all 𝐾hospitals within their respective time windows while respecting dynamic
and environmental constraints. Unlike simple waypoint following, this delivery problem imposes temporal validity on
each target, making both the spatial and timing aspects critical to mission success. To formally encode this task, we
adopt STL as a specification language, which is defined according to:
𝜑∶= 𝜋| ¬𝜑| 𝜑∧𝜓| 𝜑𝑼[𝑎,𝑏]𝜓,
where 𝜋is a predicate associated with a real-valued predicate function 𝜇𝜋; 𝜑and 𝜓are STL formulas; negation and
conjunction of formulas are denoted by ¬ and ∧; the until operator is denoted by 𝑼[𝑎,𝑏] with 𝑎, 𝑏∈[1, 𝑇]. We denote
by (𝒙, 𝑡) ⊧𝜑a trajectory 𝒙= {𝐱1, … , 𝐱𝑇} satisfies 𝜑at time 𝑡using the Boolean semantics of STL (Gilpin et al.,
2021), where (𝒙, 𝑡) ⊧𝜋⇔𝜇𝜋(𝐱𝑡) ≥0. We can evaluate the satisfaction of 𝜑quantitatively using a robustness function
𝜌𝜑such that 𝜑is satisfied if and only if 𝜌𝜑≥0 (Belta and Sadraddini, 2019). In particular, we define the eventually
operator ◊[𝑎,𝑏]𝜑∶= T𝑼[𝑎,𝑏]𝜑, where T is the true predicate. We have (𝒙, 𝑡) ⊧◊[𝑎,𝑏]𝜑if ∃𝑡′ ∈[𝑡+ 𝑎, 𝑡+ 𝑏] such that
(𝒙, 𝑡′) ⊧𝜑.
2.2.1. Eventually Operator for Delivery Constraints
For each hospital 𝐡𝑘, we define the task using the eventually operator ◊[𝜏start
𝑘
,𝜏end
𝑘
]𝜑𝑘, where 𝜑𝑘denotes a spatial
predicate indicating proximity to the hospital. Specifically, the predicate 𝜑𝑘(𝑡) is true if the UAV is within a tolerance
distance 𝜀from the delivery point at time 𝑡:
𝜑𝑘(𝑡) ∶= ‖𝐱𝑡−𝐡𝑘‖2 ≤𝜀, 𝑡∈ℤ[𝜏start
𝑘
,𝜏end
𝑘
]
(3)
The temporal logic specification requires that for each hospital, the predicate must be satisfied at least once within its
time window:
(𝒙, 0) ⊧◊[𝜏start
𝑘
,𝜏end
𝑘
]𝜑𝑘,
∀𝑘∈ℤ[1,𝐾]
(4)
2.2.2. Robustness Semantics
To make STL compatible with continuous optimization, we adopt its quantitative semantics (robustness measure).
The robustness value 𝜌𝑘(𝑡) for predicate 𝜑𝑘(𝑡) is defined as:
𝜌𝑘(𝑡) = 𝜀−‖𝐱𝑡−𝐡𝑘‖2, 𝑡∈ℤ[𝜏start
𝑘
,𝜏end
𝑘
]
(5)
Higher values of 𝜌𝑘(𝑡) indicate stronger satisfaction (i.e., the UAV is well within the target region), while negative
values indicate violation. The robustness of the full temporal operator is then defined as the maximum robustness over
the time window:
𝜌◊
𝑘= max{𝜌𝑘(𝑡), 𝑡∈ℤ[𝜏start
𝑘
,𝜏end
𝑘
]}, ∀𝑘∈ℤ[1,𝐾].
(6)
Enforcing STL satisfaction therefore amounts to requiring 𝜌◊
𝑘≥0 for all hospitals.
Chen et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 11

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Based Medical Delivery
2.3. Obstacle Representation
The operating environment is assumed to be an urban area populated with static obstacles such as buildings.
To facilitate collision checking, each obstacle is modeled as a three-dimensional, axis-aligned rectangular prism,
commonly referred to as an Axis-Aligned Bounding Box (AABB). Assume 𝑀obstacles exist in the environment,
let 𝑗⊂ℝ3 denote the region occupied by the 𝑗-th obstacle. This region is defined as:
𝑚=
⎧
⎪
⎨
⎪⎩
𝐩=
⎡
⎢
⎢⎣
𝑝𝑥
𝑝𝑦
𝑝𝑧
⎤
⎥
⎥⎦
∈ℝ3
||||||||
𝑥min
𝑚
≤𝑝𝑥≤𝑥max
𝑚
,
𝑦min
𝑚
≤𝑝𝑦≤𝑦max
𝑚
,
𝑧min
𝑚
≤𝑝𝑧≤𝑧max
𝑚
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪⎭
, ∀𝑚∈ℤ[1,𝑀]
(7)
where 𝑥min
𝑚, 𝑥max
𝑚
, 𝑦min
𝑚, 𝑦max
𝑚
, 𝑧min
𝑚, 𝑧max
𝑚
define the lower and upper bounds of the obstacle along each axis. This
representation enables efficient geometric reasoning and allows for straightforward computation of signed distances
between the UAV and obstacle boundaries.
To ensure collision-free operation, the UAV’s position 𝐱𝑡at each time step must remain outside all defined obstacle
regions:
𝐱𝑡∉𝑚, ∀𝑚∈ℤ[1,𝑀], ∀𝑡∈ℤ[1,𝑇]
(8)
2.4. Objective Function
The objective function is designed to guide the UAV toward fulfilling the delivery mission while ensuring smooth
and safe motion. It consists of three main components: (i) maximization of STL robustness, (ii) penalization of control
effort, and (iii) penalization of proximity to obstacles. Each term is weighted to balance task completion against energy
efficiency and safety.
To promote task success and encourage early satisfaction of delivery objectives, we include a term that maximizes
the robustness of the temporal logic specification:
𝐽STL = −
𝐾
∑
𝑘=1
𝜌◊
𝑘
(9)
The negative sign allows this term to be minimized in the convex optimization framework, effectively maximizing the
STL robustness values.
To ensure that the resulting trajectory is dynamically smooth and energy-efficient, we penalize excessive
acceleration. The control effort term is defined as the squared 𝓁2-norm of the acceleration inputs:
𝐽control =
𝑇−1
∑
𝑡=1
‖𝐚𝑡‖2
2
(10)
This term discourages sharp or abrupt changes in the UAV’s velocity profile.
Although obstacle avoidance is enforced through constraints, we include an obstacle proximity penalty term that
discourages the UAV from flying too close to obstacle boundaries. Following (Liu, Lin and Tomizuka, 2018), a signed
distance function 𝜙𝑚(𝐱𝑡) is defined for each obstacle 𝑚, and the proximity penalty is computed using a hinge loss:
𝐽obs =
𝑀
∑
𝑚=1
𝑇∑
𝑡=1
max(0, 𝑑safe −𝜙𝑚(𝐱𝑡))
(11)
where 𝑑safe is a user-defined safety margin. This term encourages conservative, safe separation from obstacles.
The total cost function is expressed as a weighted combination of the three components:
𝐽= 𝑤1𝐽STL + 𝑤2𝐽control + 𝑤3𝐽obs
(12)
where 𝑤1, 𝑤2, 𝑤3 > 0 are scalar weights used to balance mission satisfaction, control smoothness, and safety. These
weights are tuned empirically to ensure reliable delivery while avoiding overly aggressive or conservative behavior.
Chen et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 11

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Based Medical Delivery
3. Optimization Framework
This section presents the reformulation of the trajectory optimization problem into a tractable convex framework.
A key challenge in encoding STL constraints lies in the non-smooth and non-convex nature of temporal operators,
particularly the max operation in robustness evaluation. Directly optimizing such specifications is computationally
expensive and often unsuitable for real-time planning.
To address this, we approximate the STL robustness semantics using smooth, recursive sub-dynamics, enabling
the formulation of differentiable constraints compatible with convex programming. In parallel, obstacle avoidance
typically non-convex is handled through a linearized approximation around a reference trajectory. This results in
a sequence of convex subproblems constructed within a convex feasible set, ensuring both safety and tractability.
Together, these approximations allow the entire mission planning problem to be expressed as a standard convex
optimization program that remains efficient to solve while faithfully respecting high-level temporal and spatial
requirements.
3.1. Convex Reformulation of STL Constraints
We introduce a smooth approximation (or sub-dynamic recursion) to avoid non-smooth and non-convex max
operators in optimization. A set of auxiliary variables 𝜇𝑘(𝑡), 𝑡∈ℤ[𝜏start
𝑘
,𝜏end
𝑘
] that recursively track the maximum
robustness value are introduced:
𝜇𝑘(𝑡) = max(𝜇𝑘(𝑡−1), 𝜌𝑘(𝑡))
≈𝐺(𝜇𝑘(𝑡−1), 𝜌𝑘(𝑡), 𝛼)
∶= 1
2
(
𝜇𝑘(𝑡−1)+𝜌𝑘(𝑡)+
√
(𝜇𝑘(𝑡−1)−𝜌𝑘(𝑡))2+𝛼2
)
where 𝛼> 0 is a smoothing parameter. This approximation is then linearized about reference trajectories̄ 𝜇𝑘and̄ 𝜌𝑘,
yielding:
𝜇𝑘(𝑡) = 𝐺(̃𝜇𝑘(𝑡−1),̃ 𝜌𝑘(𝑡), 𝛼)
+ 1
2
(
1+̃
𝜇𝑘(𝑡−1) −̃ 𝜌𝑘(𝑡)
√
(̃𝜇𝑘(𝑡−1)−̃𝜌𝑘(𝑡))2+𝛼2
)
(𝜇𝑘(𝑡−1) −̃ 𝜇𝑘(𝑡−1))
+ 1
2
(
1+̃
𝜌𝑘(𝑡) −̃ 𝜇𝑘(𝑡−1)
√
(̃𝜇𝑘(𝑡−1)−̃𝜌𝑘(𝑡))2+𝛼2
)
(𝜌𝑘(𝑡) −̃ 𝜌𝑘(𝑡)).
The final STL satisfaction condition can be compactly expressed as:
𝜇𝑘(𝜏end
𝑘) ≥0,
∀𝑘∈ℤ[1,𝐾]
These constraints are integrated into the overall trajectory optimization problem, allowing the UAV to satisfy delivery
objectives in a differentiable and optimization-friendly manner. For each hospital 𝑘, the auxiliary robustness variable
𝜇𝑘(𝑡) tracks the satisfaction level of the STL eventually constraint over time. We aim to maximize the robustness, which
corresponds to the strongest satisfaction of the time-windowed goal
𝐽𝑐
STL = −
𝐾
∑
𝑘=1
𝜇𝑘(𝜏end
𝑘)
Reformulating the original STL constraints into a smooth recursive structure not only avoids the computational
burden of non-convex optimization but also ensures compatibility with convex solvers. This allows STL satisfaction
to be enforced using standard tools without requiring integer variables or case-based logic. More importantly, the
recursive formulation preserves the temporal semantics of the delivery task—ensuring that the UAV consistently
increases its satisfaction measure within the specified time window—while enabling gradient-based optimization
methods to efficiently find feasible and robust trajectories. This smooth convex approximation serves as the foundation
for integrating STL specifications into practical trajectory planning.
Chen et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 11

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Based Medical Delivery
3.2. CFS for Obstacle Avoidance
In order to address the non-convexity of obstacle avoidance constraints, we adopt the Convex Feasible Set
methodology, as originally proposed in (Liu et al., 2018). The key idea is to transform the non-convex constraint
set into a sequence of convex approximations centered around a reference trajectory. This allows the original trajectory
optimization to be solved via an iterative convex programming procedure.
Let each obstacle 𝑚⊂ℝ3 be represented implicitly by a signed distance function 𝜙𝑚(𝐱), such that:
𝜙𝑚(𝐱) ≥0 ⟺𝐱∉𝑚
Assuming 𝜙𝑚is semi-convex and piecewise smooth (as supported by signed or directional distance functions),
the feasible region for the UAV is:
Γ ∶=
𝑀
⋂
𝑚=1
{𝐱∈ℝ3 ∶𝜙𝑚(𝐱) ≥0}
At each iteration 𝑖, given a reference trajectorȳ 𝐱𝑡∶= 𝐱(𝑖−1)
𝑡
, we construct a linearized convex constraint via the first-
order Taylor expansion of 𝜙𝑚:
𝜙𝑐
𝑚(𝐱𝑡) ∶= 𝜙𝑚(̄𝐱𝑡) + ∇𝜙𝑚(̄𝐱𝑡)(𝐱𝑡−̄ 𝐱𝑡) ≥0,
∀𝑚∈ℤ[1,𝑀], ∀𝑡∈ℤ[1,𝑇],
where ∇denotes the subgradient that minimizes the cost function in the feasible set. This defines a local convex
feasible set (𝑖) ⊆Γ, which is used to solve the next convex subproblem. Iteration proceeds until convergence in cost
or trajectory. Analogously, the proximity penalty is convexified to:
𝐽𝑐
obs =
𝑀
∑
𝑚=1
𝑇∑
𝑡=1
max(0, 𝑑safe −𝜙𝑐
𝑚(𝐱𝑡))
Compared to conventional non-convex formulations, the CFS approach offers several advantages. First, it
guarantees feasibility at each iteration as long as the reference trajectory is feasible. Second, it exploits the geometric
structure of the motion planning problem, allowing for fast convergence with minimal per-iteration computation.
Finally, the formulation is compatible with standard convex solvers, making it well-suited for integration with the
STL-based delivery framework developed in this paper.
3.3. The Convex Optimization Problem
Through the series of reformulations introduced in previous sections, the original trajectory planning prob-
lem—characterized by non-smooth temporal logic constraints and non-convex obstacle regions—is transformed into
a convex optimization problem that is both tractable and solver-friendly. Specifically, the non-smooth STL constraints
are approximated using recursively defined smooth sub-dynamics, allowing STL robustness to be embedded as convex
inequality constraints. Meanwhile, obstacle avoidance is handled using linearized constraints around a reference
trajectory, derived from signed distance functions, ensuring convex feasibility at each iteration.
The complete convex optimization problem is summarized as follows:
min
𝑤1𝐽𝑐
STL + 𝑤2𝐽control + 𝑤3𝐽𝑐
obs
s.t.
𝐱𝑡+1 = 𝐱𝑡+ 𝐯𝑡Δ𝑡
𝐯𝑡+1 = 𝐯𝑡+ 𝐚𝑡Δ𝑡
‖[𝑣𝑥
𝑡, 𝑣𝑦
𝑡]⊤‖2 ≤𝑣max, ∀𝑡∈ℤ[1,𝑇]
|𝑎𝑥
𝑡| ≤𝑎max, |𝑎𝑦
𝑡| ≤𝑎max, |𝑎𝑧
𝑡| ≤𝑎max, ∀𝑡∈ℤ[1,𝑇−1]
𝐱1 = 𝐱init,
𝐯1 = 𝟎
𝜇𝑘(𝜏end
𝑘) ≥0, ∀𝑘∈ℤ[1,𝐾]
𝜙𝑐
𝑚(𝐱𝑡) ≥0, ∀𝑚∈ℤ[1,𝑀], ∀𝑡∈ℤ[1,𝑇]
Chen et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 11

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Based Medical Delivery
Table 1
Delivery Targets
Hospital
Coordinates
Time Window
(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧)
[𝜏start, 𝜏end]
𝐡1
[17, 18, 5]
[4, 15]
𝐡2
[42, 28, 5]
[10, 22]
𝐡3
[56, 20, 5]
[16, 30]
This formula consists of convex dynamics, convexified task satisfaction constraints, and locally convex approximations
of non-convex environment constraints. All terms in the objective function and all constraints are either affine or
convex, making the overall formulation compatible with standard convex solvers. This enables efficient and reliable
computation of safe, dynamically feasible UAV trajectories that respect mission timing and spatial requirements. The
proposed convex optimization algorithm for UAV trajectory planning under STL and collision avoidance constraints
is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 The proposed algorithm
Input: Waypoints {𝐡1, 𝐡2, … , 𝐡𝐾} and the associated time windows [𝜏start
𝑘
, 𝜏end
𝑘] for all 𝑘∈ℤ[1,𝐾]. Positive
weights 𝑤1, 𝑤2, and 𝑤3. Initial reference trajectorȳ 𝐱.
1: Compute initial referencē 𝜇𝑘and̄ 𝜌𝑘according tō
𝜇𝑘(𝑡) =̄ 𝜌𝑘(𝑡) = 𝜀−‖̄𝐱𝑡−𝐡𝑘‖2, 𝑡∈ℤ[𝜏start
𝑘
,𝜏end
𝑘
], 𝑘∈ℤ[1,𝐾]
2: while not converged do
3:
Formulate the convex optimization problem following the procedures in Sec. III.
4:
Solve the problem to obtain a new solution {𝐱, 𝐯, 𝐚, 𝝆, 𝝁}, where 𝝆and 𝝁collects all the 𝜌𝑘and 𝜇𝑘auxiliary
variables.
5:
Update reference trajectory bȳ 𝐱= 𝐱,̄ 𝝆= 𝝆, and̄ 𝝁= 𝝁.
6: end while
Output: The desired trajectory {𝐱, 𝐯, 𝐚, 𝝆, 𝝁}.
4. Simulation Result
4.1. Parameter Specification
The proposed trajectory optimization framework is tested in a simulated three-dimensional urban environment.
All simulations are implemented in MATLAB using the convex optimization toolbox (CVX) (Grant and Boyd, 2008)
over a discretized time horizon of 𝑇= 30 time steps with a uniform interval Δ𝑡= 1.0 seconds.
The UAV begins at the fixed initial position 𝐱1 = [0, 0, 5]⊤, which represents a rooftop launch pad at 5 meters
above ground. The UAV’s initial velocity is zero in all directions. Its motion follows the discrete-time kinematic model
defined in Section 3.1, with maximum planar speed 𝑣max = 5 m/s, and acceleration bounds 𝑎max = 2 m/s2 in all
directions.
The UAV is required to deliver medical supplies to three hospitals, each defined by a 3D location and a specific
delivery time window (shown in Table I):
Each delivery is considered successful if the UAV enters an 𝜀= 0.2 m radius of the hospital location during the
corresponding time window, as defined by the STL eventually constraint.
The simulation environment includes three static cuboid obstacles, representing buildings placed to challenge the
trajectory planning. Each obstacle is defined as an axis-aligned 3D box using its lower and upper corner coordinates:
The optimization is solved over 𝑇= 30 discrete steps using CVX. An iterative convexification procedure is
used, where a reference trajectory is refined through multiple rounds of convex optimization with obstacle-aware
linearization.
Chen et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 11

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Based Medical Delivery
Table 2
Obstacle Specification
Obstacle
𝑥-Range
𝑦-Range
𝑧-Range
1
[10, 15]
[5, 15]
[0, 15]
2
[30, 40]
[20, 30]
[0, 20]
3
[45, 55]
[5, 15]
[0, 20]
4.2. Results and Discussions
To validate the proposed convex optimization framework, we conduct simulations in the urban environment
described previously. The results are summarized in Fig. 1 through Fig. 4, demonstrating the effectiveness, convergence
behavior, and task satisfaction capability of the method.
4.2.1. Trajectory Quality and Task Completion
Fig. 1 compares the optimized UAV trajectory obtained using the proposed convex approach (orange) against that
generated by a standard Sequential Quadratic Programming (SQP) solver (blue) (Gill, Murray and Saunders, 2005).
Both 3D and top-down views are shown. The convex method successfully produces a smooth, dynamically feasible
trajectory that visits all three hospitals while respecting the obstacle constraints and STL-defined time windows. In
contrast, the SQP-based trajectory visibly deviates near the second and third hospitals and slightly overshoots the time
window boundaries, indicating a lack of robustness in satisfying temporal logic constraints.
Figure 1: Trajectory results
The proposed approach maintains appropriate clearance from obstacles, resulting in a trajectory that is both safe
and executable. The path transitions are continuous and smooth, reflecting the implicit control effort regularization in
the objective function.
4.2.2. Fast Convergence and Optimization Efficiency
The convergence of the optimization algorithm is illustrated in Fig. 2, which plots the total objective value as a
function of the outer-loop iteration number. The objective drops rapidly in the first few iterations and stabilizes after
approximately 5 rounds. This behavior indicates that the proposed STL sub-dynamics and CFS update mechanism are
effective at quickly steering the solution toward an optimal region. Most of the performance gain is achieved in the
first few iterations, enabling the method to support early termination if time-critical constraints are imposed.
Chen et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 11

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Based Medical Delivery
Figure 2: Objective function value history
Figure 3: Computational performance
Fig. 3 further confirms the computational efficiency of the approach. The average CPU time per iteration is
consistently below 0.02 seconds, with all iterations completing in under 0.22 seconds cumulatively. This lightweight
computational profile makes the proposed method well-suited for real-time or onboard applications where computation
resources are limited.
Chen et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 11

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Based Medical Delivery
4.2.3. Temporal Logic Satisfaction and Robustness
To assess how well the trajectory satisfies the STL temporal constraints, Fig. 4 shows the evolution of the
robustness values 𝜇𝑘(t) for each of the three hospital goals over the planning horizon. Each curve corresponds to
the quantitative satisfaction level of the eventually condition associated with a hospital target.
Figure 4: STL function history
The robustness functions exhibit a sharp rise as the UAV approaches each hospital within its time window,
eventually reaching zero and staying flat afterward. This behavior confirms that the UAV not only enters the goal
region but does so within the prescribed temporal interval and with a sufficient safety margin. The positive slope of
each 𝜇𝑘(t) curve further suggests that the planner actively improves satisfaction over time rather than passively meeting
minimal requirements.
4.2.4. Comparative Discussion and Practical Implications
Compared to the SQP baseline, the proposed method yields more consistent satisfaction of STL goals, better
obstacle margin handling, and lower trajectory curvature. Additionally, the convex formulation avoids local minima
issues that often arise in nonlinear optimization, as evidenced by the smoother and more accurate trajectory shapes in
Fig. 1.
The iterative structure of the method, combined with convex programming at each stage, enables robust and
predictable convergence even from a simple straight-line initialization. These properties make the approach particularly
suitable for deployment in safety-critical scenarios such as UAV-based medical delivery, where mission success and
timing compliance are essential.
5. Conclusion
This paper presents a convex trajectory optimization framework for UAV-based medical delivery missions with
spatial and temporal constraints. By reformulating STL specifications into smooth sub-dynamics and applying convex
approximations for obstacle avoidance, the method transforms a non-convex planning problem into a standard convex
program solvable by efficient optimization tools. Simulation results show that the proposed approach produces dynam-
ically feasible, obstacle-free trajectories that successfully satisfy all delivery deadlines, outperforming conventional
nonlinear methods in both robustness and trajectory quality. The algorithm also exhibits fast convergence and low
computational overhead, making it well-suited for real-time implementation. Future work will extend the approach to
multi-agent coordination and dynamic, uncertain environments.
Chen et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 11

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
Trajectory Optimization for UAV-Based Medical Delivery
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kaiyuan Chen: Methodology, Software, writing-original draft, Writing - Review & Editing. Yuhan Suo:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, writing-original draft. Shaowei Cui: Writing - Review & Editing.
Yuanqing Xia: Review, supervision. Wannian Liang: Review, supervision. Shuo Wang: Writing - Review & Editing.
References
Aggarwal, S., Kumar, N., 2020.
Path planning techniques for unmanned aerial vehicles: A review, solutions, and challenges.
Computer
Communications 149, 270–299. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2019.10.014.
Bauer, J., Moormann, D., Strametz, R., Groneberg, D.A., 2021.
Development of unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) networks delivering early
defibrillation for out-of-hospital cardiac arrests (OHCA) in areas lacking timely access to emergency medical services (EMS) in Germany: a
comparative economic study. BMJ Open 11. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2020-043791.
Belta, C., Sadraddini, S., 2019. Formal methods for control synthesis: An optimization perspective. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and
Autonomous Systems 2, 115–140. doi:https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-control-053018-023717.
Betts, J.T., 2010. Practical Methods for Optimal Control and Estimation Using Nonlinear Programming, Second Edition. Society for Industrial and
Applied Mathematics. doi:10.1137/1.9780898718577.
Buyukkocak, A.T., Aksaray, D., 2025. Resilient online planning for mobile robots with minimal relaxation of signal temporal logic specifications.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 10, 5935–5942. doi:10.1109/LRA.2025.3563119.
Buyukkocak, A.T., Aksaray, D., Yazıcıoğlu, Y., 2021. Planning of heterogeneous multi-agent systems under signal temporal logic specifications
with integral predicates. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 6, 1375–1382. doi:10.1109/LRA.2021.3057049.
Chen, Q., Cheng, S., Hovakimyan, N., 2023. Simultaneous spatial and temporal assignment for fast uav trajectory optimization using bilevel
optimization. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 8, 3860–3867. doi:10.1109/LRA.2023.3273399.
Chen, Z., Cai, M., Zhou, Z., Li, L., Kan, Z., 2025. Fast motion planning in dynamic environments with extended predicate-based temporal logic.
IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering 22, 5293–5307. doi:10.1109/TASE.2024.3418409.
Foehn, P., Romero, A., Scaramuzza, D., 2021. Time-optimal planning for quadrotor waypoint flight. Science Robotics 6, eabh1221. doi:10.1126/
scirobotics.abh1221.
Funk, N., Tarrio, J., Papatheodorou, S., Alcantarilla, P.F., Leutenegger, S., 2023.
Orientation-Aware Hierarchical, Adaptive-Resolution A*
Algorithm for UAV Trajectory Planning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 8, 6723–6730. doi:10.1109/LRA.2023.3308490.
Gill, P.E., Murray, W., Saunders, M.A., 2005. SNOPT: An SQP Algorithm for Large-Scale Constrained Optimization. SIAM Review 47, 99–131.
doi:10.1137/S0036144504446096.
Gilpin, Y., Kurtz, V., Lin, H., 2021. A smooth robustness measure of signal temporal logic for symbolic control. IEEE Control Systems Letters 5,
241–246. doi:10.1109/LCSYS.2020.3001875.
Grant, M., Boyd, S., 2008. Graph implementations for nonsmooth convex programs, in: Blondel, V., Boyd, S., Kimura, H. (Eds.), Recent Advances
in Learning and Control. Springer-Verlag Limited. Lecture Notes in Control and Information Sciences, pp. 95–110.
Gundana, D., Kress-Gazit, H., 2021. Event-based signal temporal logic synthesis for single and multi-robot tasks. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters 6, 3687–3694. doi:10.1109/LRA.2021.3064220.
Kuang, H., Liu, X., 2024. Convergence-guaranteed trajectory optimization for quadrotors subject to aerodynamic drag. IEEE Transactions on
Aerospace and Electronic Systems 60, 7251–7261. doi:10.1109/TAES.2024.3414958.
Liu, C., Lin, C.Y., Tomizuka, M., 2018. The convex feasible set algorithm for real time optimization in motion planning. SIAM Journal on Control
and Optimization 56, 2712–2733. doi:10.1137/16M1091460.
Malyuta, D., Reynolds, T.P., Szmuk, M., Lew, T., Bonalli, R., Pavone, M., Açıkmeşe, B., 2022. Convex optimization for trajectory generation: A
tutorial on generating dynamically feasible trajectories reliably and efficiently. IEEE Control Systems Magazine 42, 40–113. doi:10.1109/
MCS.2022.3187542.
Morrell, B., Thakker, R., Merewether, G., Reid, R., Rigter, M., Tzanetos, T., Chamitoff, G., 2018. Comparison of trajectory optimization algorithms
for high-speed quadrotor flight near obstacles. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 3, 4399–4406. doi:10.1109/LRA.2018.2868866.
Romero, A., Sun, S., Foehn, P., Scaramuzza, D., 2022. Model predictive contouring control for time-optimal quadrotor flight. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics 38, 3340–3356. doi:10.1109/TRO.2022.3173711.
Szmuk, M., Malyuta, D., Reynolds, T.P., Mceowen, M.S., Açikmeşe, B., 2019. Real-time quad-rotor path planning using convex optimization and
compound state-triggered constraints, in: 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 7666–7673.
doi:10.1109/IROS40897.2019.8967706.
Zhang, G., Liu, X., 2022.
Uav collision avoidance using mixed-integer second-order cone programming.
Journal of Guidance, Control, and
Dynamics 45, 1732–1738. doi:10.2514/1.G006353.
Chen et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 11
