--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
A Robust Optimization Framework for Two-Echelon Vehicle and
UAV Routing for Post-Disaster Humanitarian Logistics Operations
Tasnim Ibn Faiz
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115, USA
Chrysaﬁs Vogiatzis
Industrial and Enterprise Systems Engineering
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Urbana, IL 61801, USA
Md. Noor-E-Alam∗
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering
Northeastern University
Boston, MA 02115, USA
Abstract
Providing ﬁrst aid and other supplies (e.g., epi-pens, medical supplies, dry food, water)
during and after a disaster is always challenging. The complexity of these operations increases
when the transportation, power, and communications networks fail, leaving people stranded
and unable to communicate their locations and needs. The advent of emerging technologies
like uncrewed autonomous vehicles can help humanitarian logistics providers reach otherwise
stranded populations after transportation network failures.
However, due to the failures in
telecommunication infrastructure, demand for emergency aid can become uncertain. To address
the challenges of delivering emergency aid to trapped populations with failing infrastructure
networks, we propose a novel robust computational framework for a two-echelon vehicle routing
problem that uses uncrewed autonomous vehicles, or drones, for the deliveries. We formulate
the problem as a two-stage robust optimization model to handle demand uncertainty. Then, we
propose a column-and-constraint generation approach for worst-case demand scenario generation
for a given set of truck and drone routes. Moreover, we develop a decomposition scheme inspired
by the column generation approach to heuristically generate drone routes for a set of demand
scenarios.
Finally, we combine the heuristic decomposition scheme within the column-and-
constraint generation approach to determine robust routes for both trucks and drones, the
time that aﬀected communities are served, and the quantities of aid materials delivered. To
validate our proposed computational framework, we use a simulated dataset that aims to recreate
emergency aid requests in diﬀerent areas of Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria in 2017.
Keywords: humanitarian logistics, two-echelon vehicle and drone routing, two-stage robust
optimization, column generation, column-and-constraint generation, disaster management
∗Corresponding author. Email: mnalam@neu.edu.
1
arXiv:2207.11879v1  [math.OC]  25 Jul 2022

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
1
Introduction
In this work, we investigate a paradigm for humanitarian relief operations in the absence of stable
transportation, communication, and power infrastructures. Providing relief to aﬀected populations
in the form of ﬁrst aid items, blankets, water, and dry food, is diﬃcult even in the presence of a fully
functional built environment. When the infrastructure itself is prone to failures, these operations
become even more challenging as people may become stranded without access to telecommunica-
tions, transportation, or power. The advent of uncrewed autonomous vehicles (UAVs) provides
us with a reliable means of reaching populations otherwise unreachable due to the failures in the
built environment. At the same time, we can do so with fewer risks for the ﬁrst responders. While
UAVs are naturally suited to improving safety under these conditions, they also present us with
new challenges, namely the inherent computational diﬃculty of such routing operations and the
uncertainty of the location and number of demand requests to which they need to respond. To
that end, we propose a new robust optimization framework to incorporate demand information
uncertainty within a two-echelon vehicle routing problem to aid trapped populations using ground
vehicles and deliver it using UAVs.
We are primarily motivated by the situation in Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria in 2017. The
hurricane made landfall on September 21, and eventually left behind an island without much of
its built environment: power, and consequently communications, were unavailable even as much
as three weeks after the disaster hit (see Figures 1 and 2, as well as newspaper articles, e.g., [54]).
All 78 counties in Puerto Rico had more than 75% of their cell sites out of service until September
29, 2017. Even then, most counties had no cell phone coverage, with 100% of their cell sites being
deactivated during and after landfall, as shown in Figure 2. It took 44 days for all counties to have
at least some cellular coverage. On a similar note, 46 days passed until every county had at least
half its cell sites reinstated. In addition, people were also stranded due to damaged roads, making
it impossible to know their locations and conditions (no communication) or drive to them (no
transportation) for days [34]. Our proposed framework would help provide assistance and valuable
items to these trapped populations in a robust manner.
The paper is outlined as follows. First, we provide a brief literature review in Section 2. In
Section 3, we proceed to deﬁne our problem formally and provide our formulation, followed by our
novel solution approach. In that same section, we describe all aspects of our robust framework,
including the proposed column generation approach and the scenario generation subproblem. Sec-
tion 4 provides a case study on a simulated dataset that aims to capture the demands in Puerto
Rico after Hurricane Maria. We conclude our work in Section 5 with a summary of our ﬁndings
and plans for future work in this area.
2
Literature review and contributions
In this section, we provide a brief literature review, before we present our main contributions.
2.1
Review of relevant research
We begin with the formal deﬁnition of the two-echelon vehicle routing problem (2EVRP) [11, 12, 41],
an interesting extension of the traditional vehicle routing problem.
Deﬁnition 1 (2EVRP). Given a graph G(V, E), where the nodeset V consists of 0 (depot), a set
of candidate locations S, and a set of customers C (i.e., V = {0} ∪S ∪C), real values τij for the
costs of every edge (i, j) ∈E, and real values fi for the costs of using a node i, the 2EVRP aims
2

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
Figure 1: Percentage of cell sites that were active and working to provide access to cell phone
reception since landfall (September 21, 2017) and until January 4, 2018. More than 90 days after
Hurricane Maria’s landfall, the number was still shy of 100%. More importantly, three weeks after
landfall, that percentage was only 23.7%.
All data was taken by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) [18].
21-Sep
28-Sep
5-Oct
12-Oct
19-Oct
26-Oct
2-Nov
9-Nov
16-Nov
23-Nov
30-Nov
7-Dec
14-Dec
21-Dec
28-Dec
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Date
% of active cell sites
Figure 2: Number of counties (out of a total of 78 on the island of Puerto Rico) with no active cell
site since landfall and until November 9, 2017. All data was taken by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) [18].
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
Days after landfall
# Puerto Rico counties
3

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
Figure 3: Four related problems in the literature. The Traveling Salesperson Problem (TSP, top
left), the Covering Traveling Salesperson Problem (Covering TSP, top right), the traditional Vehicle
Routing Problem (VRP, bottom left), and the Two-Echelon Vehicle Routing Problem (2EVRP,
bottom right).
to identify: (a) the set of facilities S ⊆S to use; (b) the circuit from 0 to every node s ∈S; (c)
the assignment of customers C to a node s ∈S; and (d) the circuits from s ∈S to every customer
assigned to s with minimum total cost.
We note here that the problem can be easily shown to be NP-hard, by transforming it to the
traditional vehicle routing problem by letting only one satellite station. The 2EVRP is an extension
of the traditional vehicle routing problem, where a set of customer locations needs to be visited
by one of the tours that start and end at a facility. It is also very closely related to the covering
traveling salesperson problem [13, 20, 22] and its “close-enough” variants [3, 24], where we identify
a circuit that visits a subset of the nodes such that every other node is in close proximity to at least
one visited node. We present the relationship and similarities between some of these two problems
in visual form in Figure 3.
Exact solution methods for the 2EVRP are primarily based on branch-and-cut algorithms, such
as the one proposed in [23], which later served as a starting point for numerous follow-up studies
[28, 39, 41]. Later, Santos et al. used column generation in the setting of 2EVRPs to propose
both a branch-and-price approach [47] and a branch-and-cut-and-price [48] with additional valid
4

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
inequalities. Strong valid inequalities have also been recently proposed in [33, 40]. As expected,
heuristic approaches have been put to the use, as is the case with the large neighborhood search
procedures proposed in [6, 26].
As can be seen by the setup of the 2EVRP, it oﬀers a suitable framework to model new logistics
technologies, such as the use of uncrewed autonomous vehicles for last-mile deliveries. Due to the
advent of UAVs, research in vehicle routing problems with the use of drones is booming, as is obvious
by the ever increasing number of publications and scholarly activities involving UAVs in logistics.
One of the ﬁrst attempts at mathematically modeling a coordination problem between a truck and
a drone is made in [36], where a traditional vehicle and its “ﬂying sidekick” (a UAV/drone) satisfy
static and deterministic demand in a geographic location; an extension to multiple “sidekicks” has
appeared recently in [14]. Later, the traveling salesperson problem with drones and the vehicle
routing problem with drones were introduced in [1] and [46, 53], respectively. Branch-and-cut,
which has gained popularity in solving 2EVRPs, has also been shown to work well in practice with
the TSP with drones [49]. Dynamic programming has also been successful in dealing with the TSP
with drones problem, leading to faster solutions in larger instances compared to using commercial
solvers [5].
Interestingly, due to the nature of the logistics problems that are usually of interest, heuristics
involving route-ﬁrst, cluster/assign-later approaches are very prominent. In [1], the authors propose
route-ﬁrst cluster-second heuristics and derive approximation guarantees for their performance,
while in [44], a TSP solution is transformed eventually into a solution involving drone deliveries in
a smart, ﬂexible manner. The idea of transforming a TSP solution to a tour that involves drones is
prominent in other recent works as well, either with the use of k-means clustering ﬁrst [9], adaptive
insertion [29], or local searches and Greedy Randomized Adaptive Search Procedures (GRASP)
[25]. There also exist other heuristic procedures to help solve problems where a customer can be
visited by either a truck or a drone, as in [15].
Moreover, math-based heuristics that are motivated by well-known combinatorial optimization
techniques, such as branch-and-bound or column generation, are also of interest to our community.
For example, heuristics are employed in an attempt to prune the branch-and-bound tree and speed
up computations in [45]. A diﬀerent heuristic approach, inspired by column generation, is proposed
and used in [17] to solve a problem with drones in a humanitarian relief setting, where part of
the drones are tasked with providing cell phone coverage to an aﬀected area in addition to the
drones tasked with making deliveries. This application of using drones to deliver medical aid is
also explored in [21]: the main diﬀerence to our work is that here, we oﬀer a robust optimization
approach to tackle the uncertainty of demand locations and demand quantities. Finally, a recent
work dispels with the discretization of locations from where a drone can be deployed and/or received,
and allows for drone movements in a continuous manner, that is, we are allowed to deploy and
receive a drone on a moving truck while it is traversing an edge [35].
Since our decision problem is stochastic in nature, we continue this literature review with
the stochastic VRP. Uncertainty can arise in multiple aspects of the problem including demands,
deadlines/time windows, costs/times, etc. Traditional vehicle routing problems with and without
capacity constraints have addressed uncertainty in a number of ways. An early work in the area
by Gendreau et al. proposed a two-stage stochastic integer programming framework, where routes
are designed in the ﬁrst stage and during the second stage the locations with no demand are
skipped after demand realization [19]. In [50], the authors adopt a robust optimization approach
with scenario-based decomposition to solve a vehicle routing problem with stochastic service times.
Probabilistic versions of the traveling salesperson problem have also been proposed over the years, as
in the probabilistic traveling salesperson problem with deadlines [7] where customers are stochastic
and, additionally, need to be visited before a certain time.
An extension, where deadlines are
5

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
replaced by time windows, is oﬀered in [51]. A dynamic vehicle routing problem with time windows
is proposed and then solved by column generation in [10]. Hvattum et al. consider the case when
both customer locations and demands are only partially known in advance: that is, customers can
call in orders with their demands and time windows. The problem is modeled as a dynamic and
stochastic programming problem, and a multistage heuristic is proposed [27]. A similar dynamic
problem with stochastic customers and partially available information a priori is solved in [4], with
routes being generated continuously for the available scenarios, and a consensus methodology is
adopted to select the best routes.
Several works adopting two-stage stochastic and robust optimization approaches for handling
uncertainties in VRPs can be found in the literature. In contrast, literature on exact approaches
for solving 2EVRP with stochastic parameters is very limited. Few available works have addressed
such problems with simulation-based [32] and metaheuristic approaches (e.g., genetic algorithms
[52]). With our contributions in this work, we aim to ﬁll this gap in the literature.
We ﬁnish this literature review with a brief discussion of recent works in vehicle routing problems
in humanitarian aid and relief operations. Interested readers are referred to the excellent surveys in
[2, 8, 30, 31]. Vehicle routing problems are, of course, a prominent aspect of humanitarian logistics
especially in the aftermath of natural and human-made disasters (see, e.g., [16, 37, 38]). However,
the underlying assumption of these studies is that post disaster vehicle routing and aid delivery
happen in a fully functional transportation network, which unfortunately is less than realistic in
many disasters. In the absence of a stable transportation network, emerging technologies (such
as the use of UAVs) and innovative approaches (such as stochastic and robust frameworks) are
necessary, and this is indeed the premise of our study.
2.2
Our contributions
Our work focuses on addressing two critical challenges. First, from the side of humanitarian logis-
tics, we assume that the infrastructure is unstable or unusable for ground vehicles after a disaster.
UAVs are included in the humanitarian logistics planning operations to deliver medical items to
trapped communities that are unreachable via ground transportation network. Secondly, since the
telecommunication infrastructure has failed, we cannot assume that we have a priori knowledge of
demand locations and quantities. The stochasticity in the parameters of modern routing problems
involving UAVs has already been noted as an important future research direction [42]. Therefore,
we propose a novel robust optimization framework, that we refer to as R-2EVRP-UAV (Robust
2-Echelon Vehicle Routing Problem with UAVs) to tackle the unavailable information on the
location and the quantities of demands. The framework is described in more detail in Section 3.2.
Speciﬁcally, our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We investigate the 2EVRP with stochastic demands in a post-disaster setting. In this setting,
trucks can use part of the transportation infrastructure and can carry drones that are deployed
towards communities to deliver aid. Our motivating assumption is that aid demands at the
communities are not known in advance (uncertain demands) prior to route determination,
hence the need for a robust optimization framework.
• Then, we present a decomposition framework and a heuristic approach, based on column
generation techniques for generating UAV routes. Our decomposition approach leverages the
problem structure and constructs small size pricing subproblems, which enables us to solve
large-scale problems.
6

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
• Finally, we develop a novel decision framework (R-2EVRP-UAV). For handling demand un-
certainty, we design a column-and-constraint generation algorithm to generate demand sce-
narios. We then solve the decision model with an innovative computational framework that
includes an outer level column-and-constraint generation and an inner level column genera-
tion method. Our model formulation and solution approach for robust 2EVRP with drones
ﬁlls the gap in the state-of-the-art robust approach for handling uncertainty in 2EVRPs.
3
Mathematical formulation
3.1
Notation
We begin with the necessary notation for our problem. Let G(V, E) be a simple graph, representing
the transportation network and the UAV aerial routes available. We speciﬁcally have that V =
{0} ∪S ∪C, where 0 is the depot, S is an already identiﬁed set of candidate satellite locations,
and C is the set of aﬀected communities. Note that there exist certain communities in C that are
reachable from a UAV departing from satellite station s ∈S (i.e., these communities are within the
range of satellite station s). We note these communities as Cs and, thus we have that C = S
s∈S Cs.
Moreover, we let E = Et ∪Ed, where Et is the set of edges that a truck can use; on the other
hand, UAVs can use any edge in the network (hence, Ed are the edges that can only be used by a
UAV). We can also deﬁne subsets Ed
s, consisting of all drone edges that we can use when the truck
is located at satellite station s, and hence we have Ed = S
s∈S Ed
s.
We make the assumption that all of the trucks and drones employed are identical. We also
assume that weather conditions are deterministic and vehicle speeds (truck and drone) are constant
and known. Hence, for all edges in the network, we associate constant traversal times denoted by
t for trucks and d for UAVs. Speciﬁcally, τ t
ij deﬁned for all (i, j) ∈Et are the traversal times for
trucks and τ d
ij deﬁned for all (i, j) ∈Ed are the traversal times for drones.
We use Ds to represent the drones available at a truck that has stopped at satellite station s.
Similarly, we deﬁne a set of available routes for a drone originating from satellite station s. As those
are exponentially many, we only use a restricted set of routes, denoted as Vs, ∀s ∈S. Note that if
community c ∈Cs is visited during a route p ∈Vs, then we write that bp
c = 1; 0, otherwise. We
also let Ωrepresent all scenarios, with Ω′ being the set of scenarios included in the main problem.
Qω
c represents the quantity of items that community c would request under scenario ω.
For a given UAV ℓ∈Ds and route p ∈Vs originating from satellite station s ∈S, we deﬁne
Πd
sp as the total route duration, tsℓ
c as the visiting time of community c, and dωp
sc as the delivery
quantity to community c for every scenario ω. These quantities are all known, provided we have
already generated the route (as will be shown in our pricing subproblem).
Continuing with the parameters of our model, we have mt and md be the number of trucks
available and the number of drones available per truck, respectively. F T
c
is the penalty cost per
unit of time for delaying in aid delivery to community c; F R
c is the penalty cost for failing to reach
a community altogether; F D
c
is the shortage cost per unit of unmet demand. Finally, each drone
has a ﬂying range of W d. We measure this range in “units of time”: it can then be viewed as a
budget for how much time the UAV can spend before it needs to return to the truck at the satellite
station. A similar modeling assumption has been followed in previous work (see, e.g., [17, 43]).
Drones are also restricted by a maximum carry load, denoted by Lmax.
We are now ready to proceed with the description of our framework in subsection 3.2, before
moving to our main problem (in subsection 3.3), our pricing subproblem (in subsection 3.4), and
our scenario generation subproblem (in subsection 3.5).
7

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
Figure 4: A big-picture representation of the problem we are solving. One truck, starting from
the depot, is allowed to use the transportation network (which connects the numbered nodes, in
blue) in order to approach the aﬀected communities (in red). Once the truck visits a node, it is
allowed to deploy two drones (red and green) which visit a subset of the communities each, before
returning to the truck. A yellow shaded circle with a number node (satellite station) as its center
and dash-lined boundary represents the ﬂying range of the drones when deployed from a satellite
station.
depot
1
2
3
4
3.2
Framework
In the problem we aim to solve, the objective is to minimize the cost of delay in reaching communities
and the cost of failing to reach a community or fully satisfy its (uncertain) demand, while addressing
the following questions:
1. Starting from the depot, what is the optimal set of satellite stations for a truck to visit?
2. For each satellite station visited, what is the optimal set of aﬀected communities for a delivery
drone to serve?
We present a big-picture view of our problem in Figure 4. In this example, our one truck is asked
to visit nodes 2 and 4 (through 3), and deploy two drones at each of the nodes to visit a subset of
the aﬀected communities before returning.
We now present the two-stage robust decision framework that we term R-2EVRP-UAV (Robust
2-Echelon Vehicle Routing Problem with UAVs).
Contrary to other approaches in handling
uncertainty (see, e.g., previous work where demands are ﬁrst queried and then satisﬁed in [17]),
here we propose a robust optimization framework. We ﬁrst identify the worst-case demand instances
given an uncertainty budget, and then make decisions for scheduling and routing to minimize the
objective function. The framework is depicted for simplicity in Figure 5.
8

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
Figure 5: The proposed two-stage robust decision framework.
Figure 6: The proposed column generation for solving the ﬁrst stage problem of R-2EVRP-UAV.
In the main problem, we use a restricted set of the (exponentially many) drone routes, that we
then supplement with new ones from our pricing subproblem.
Drone route set for      
R-RMP
Solve R-RMP without 
integrality restriction
Negative 
reduced 
cost?
Solve pricing 
subproblem for each 
satelite and each drone
Yes
No
Solve R-RMP with 
integrality restriction
Add drone routes
Stop
Initialize drone route set
The ﬁrst stage problem is solved using a column generation framework. In the main problem,
namely R-RMP (Robust Restricted Main Problem), we have a restricted set of drone routes that
9

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
we can use, whereas in the pricing subproblem, we generate new routes to enter into our restricted
set. We visualize this process, for convenience, in Figure 6.
3.3
Robust Restricted main problem
We need the following decision variables. First, we have the ﬁrst echelon (truck) routing variable
as xij, which is equal to 1 if arc (i, j) ∈Et is used. Second, we deﬁne a binary variable for the
second echelon (drone/UAV) routing as zsℓ
p , which is equal to 1 if drone ℓ∈Ds, deployed from
satellite station s ∈S is tasked with following route p ∈Vs; 0, otherwise. As mentioned in the
problem deﬁnition, some community c ∈C may be left without a delivery. If that happens, then
binary variables Jc will be equal to 1.
We also deﬁne timing variables. The elapsed time until we reach community c ∈C by some
drone deployed from satellite station s ∈S is denoted as T d
sc. With a slight misuse of notation, the
elapsed time until a truck reaches a satellite station s is denoted as Ts. The length of time that a
truck spends idle at satellite station s ∈S is ∆s.
Finally, we need variables to keep track of the cost for failing to deliver all quantities requested.
This missed delivery amount at community c ∈C under scenario ω is deﬁned as Rω
c . Y is an
artiﬁcial variable representing the total recourse cost.
With these deﬁnitions at hand, we now
present the main problem in (1).
min
X
s∈S
X
c∈C
F T
c T d
sc +
X
c∈C
F R
c Jc + Y
(1a)
s.t.
X
j∈V :(0,j)∈Et
xij ≤mt,
(1b)
X
j∈V :(i,j)∈Et
xij −
X
j∈V :(j,i)∈Et
xji = 0,
∀i ∈V \ {0} ,
(1c)
Tj ≥Ti + ∆i + τ t
ij −M (1 −xij) ,
∀(i, j) ∈Et,
(1d)
Tj ≤Ti + ∆i + τ t
ij + M (1 −xij) ,
∀(i, j) ∈Et,
(1e)
X
ℓ∈Ds
X
p∈Vs
zsℓ
p −md
X
(i,s)∈Et
xis ≤0,
∀s ∈S,
(1f)
X
p∈Vs
zsℓ
p −
X
(i,s)∈Et
xis ≤0,
∀ℓ∈Ds, ∀s ∈S,
(1g)
X
p∈Vs
Πd
spzsℓ
p −∆s ≤0,
∀ℓ∈Ds, ∀s ∈S,
(1h)
X
s∈S
X
ℓ∈Ds
X
p∈Vs
bp
czsℓ
p + Jc = 1,
∀c ∈C,
(1i)
Ts +
X
ℓ∈Ds
X
p∈Vs
tsℓ
c zsℓ
p −M

1 −
X
ℓ∈Ds
X
p∈Vs
bp
czsℓ
p

≤T d
sc,
∀c ∈Cs, ∀s ∈S,
(1j)
Y ≥
X
c∈C
F D
c Rω
c ,
∀ω ∈Ω′,
(1k)
X
s∈S
X
ℓ∈Ds
X
p∈Vs
zsℓ
p dωp
sc + Rω
c ≥Qω
c ,
∀ω ∈Ω′, ∀c ∈C,
(1l)
xij ∈{0, 1} ,
∀(i, j) ∈Et,
(1m)
10

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
zsℓ
p ∈{0, 1} ,
∀ℓ∈Ds, ∀p ∈Vs, ∀s ∈S,
(1n)
Jc ∈{0, 1} ,
∀c ∈C,
(1o)
Ts ≥0,
∀s ∈S,
(1p)
∆s ≥0,
∀s ∈S,
(1q)
T d
sc ≥0,
∀c ∈Cs, ∀s ∈S,
(1r)
Rω
c ≥0,
∀c ∈C, ∀ω ∈Ω′,
(1s)
Y ≥0.
(1t)
The objective function in (1a) minimizes: (a) the total time (delay cost) to reach all communities
by delivery drones, (b) total cost of failure to reach communities, and (c) the recourse cost of failing
to satisfy demands at the aﬀected communities. Constraints (1b) limit the maximum number of
trucks that can be used; ﬂow preservation for trucks is ensured by constraints (1c). Constraints
(1d) and (1e) dictate the time it takes a truck to reach each satellite node. In constraints (1f)
and (1g), we ensure that delivery drones are only dispatched from a satellite node if a truck has
visited that node; furthermore, the number of delivery drones dispatched is limited by the number
of drones carried by that truck. According to constraints (1h), the lengths of time that a truck
has to spend at a satellite location due to ﬂights of delivery drones are bounded by the maximum
ﬂight times of delivery routes originating from that satellite, respectively. Constraints (1i) ensure
that every community is either visited by a delivery drone or the variable Jc takes a non-zero value.
Constraint set (1j) deﬁnes the required times to reach every community by a delivery drone from
each satellite. Constraints (1k) indicate that, for each scenario ω, variable Y must take at least the
value of the cost of failing to satisfy the demand quantities at that scenario. Constraints (1l) ensure
that, in each scenario, the demand at each aﬀected community must be satisﬁed by the delivery
drone or the recourse variable Rω
c takes a positive value equal to the missed delivery amount. The
variable restrictions are given in (1m)–(1t), following the deﬁnitions provided.
Finally, before we proceed to the pricing subproblem, we deﬁne dual variables associated with
constraints (1f) (θs, ∀s ∈S), (1g) (φsℓ, ∀ℓ∈Ds, ∀s ∈S), (1h) (ρsℓ, ∀ℓ∈Ds, ∀s ∈S), (1i)
(ξc, ∀c ∈C), (1j) (αsc, ∀c ∈Cs, ∀s ∈S), and (1l) (βω
c , ∀ω ∈Ω′, ∀c ∈C). We can now discuss
the corresponding pricing subproblem in the next subsection.
3.4
Pricing subproblem
As expected, we need some newly deﬁned decision variables to formulate the subproblem. Seeing as
in the pricing subproblem our goal is to generate routes (see Figure 6), we start with variable vsℓ
ij ,
which is equal to 1 if (i, j) ∈Ed
s is used by drone ℓ∈Ds, and 0 otherwise. The time it takes drone
ℓ∈Ds before it reaches node j ∈Cs ∪{s} (i.e., a community that is reachable from the satellite
station s or the station itself at the end of the tour) is denoted by tsℓ
j . The quantity transported
on the drone ℓ∈Ds while traversing arc (i, j) ∈Ed
s under scenario ω is qωsℓ
ij . Finally, the amount
of items that is actually delivered at community c ∈C from drone ℓ∈Ds under scenario ω is pωsℓ
c
.
Let RCsℓbe the reduced cost for s ∈S, ℓ∈Ds. Using the dual variables obtained from (1), we
have that:
RCsℓ= −θs−φsℓ−
X
j∈Cs
X
(i,j)∈Eds
vsℓ
ij

ξsj + ρsℓτ d
ij

−
X
j∈Cs
αsj

tsℓ
j + M
X
(i,j)∈Eds
vsℓ
ij

−
X
ω∈Ω′
X
j∈Cs
βω
j pωsℓ
j
.
Then, the pricing subproblem for every satellite station s ∈S, and every drone ℓ∈Ds is given by
11

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
the mixed integer linear program in (2).
min RCsℓ
(2a)
s.t.
X
(i,j)∈Eds
vsℓ
ij τ d
ij ≤W d,
(2b)
X
(i,j)∈Eds
vsℓ
sj ≤1,
(2c)
X
(i,j)∈Eds
vsℓ
ij ≤1,
∀j ∈Cs,
(2d)
X
i:(i,j)∈Eds
vsℓ
ij −
X
i:(j,i)∈Eds
vsℓ
ji = 0,
∀j ∈Cs,
(2e)
tsℓ
j ≥tsℓ
i + τ d
ij −W d 
1 −vsℓ
ij

,
∀(i, j) ∈Ed
s,
(2f)
tsℓ
j ≤tsℓ
i + τ d
ij + W d 
1 −vsℓ
ij

,
∀(i, j) ∈Ed
s,
(2g)
qωsℓ
ij
≤vsℓ
ij Lmax,
∀ω ∈Ω′, ∀(i, j) ∈Ed
s,
(2h)
X
(i,j)∈Eds
qωsℓ
ij
−
X
(j,k)∈Eds
qωsℓ
jk = pωsℓ
j
,
∀ω ∈Ω′, ∀j ∈Cs,
(2i)
X
j∈Cs
pωsℓ
j
≤Lmax,
∀ω ∈Ω′,
(2j)
vsℓ
ij ∈{0, 1} ,
∀(i, j) ∈Ed
s, ∀ℓ∈Ds,
(2k)
tsℓ
j ≥0,
∀j ∈Cs,
(2l)
qωsℓ
ij
≥0,
∀ω ∈Ω′, ∀(i, j) ∈Ed
s,
(2m)
pωsℓ
j
≥0,
∀ω ∈Ω′, ∀j ∈Cs.
(2n)
The objective function in (2a) minimizes the reduced cost of a delivery drone route. That way,
we can pick new routes to add to the main problem (R-RMP). All new routes need to respect
the ﬂying range capabilities of a drone, and this is enforced in (2b). Constraints (2c) and (2d)
state that a valid route is one that starts from the satellite station and visits each community
location at most once. Constraints (2e) are traditional ﬂow preservation constraints at each of the
community locations. Constraints (2f) and (2g) deﬁne the time that a drone can reach a community.
Constraints (2h)–(2j) work together to ensure that the drone does not carry more load than its
capacity Lmax and that the amount of product that a drone carries is reduced by the amount
delivered in communities visited earlier in the route.
We note here that the subproblem is posed for every satellite station s ∈S and every UAV
ℓ∈Ds that originates from a truck stopped at s. This implies that the best route for the ﬁrst
delivery drone picked from Ds would also be the best route for every other drone in Ds. To avoid
generating the same route multiple times, and in order to identify a diverse set of candidate columns
to enter into the restricted main problem, we design a heuristic approach by updating the list of
communities to be visited for each subsequent pricing subproblem.
Let Cs
ℓbe the set of community nodes visited when solving the pricing subproblem for satellite
12

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
station s and drone ℓ. In mathematical terms, we have
Cs
ℓ=


j ∈Cs :
X
(i,j)∈Eds
vsℓ
ij = 1


.
The update is quite simple: we drop all communities that are included in previously generated
routes from Cs. Mathematically, for pricing subproblem ℓ, we update as follows:
Cs ←Cs \
( [
ℓ′<ℓ
Cℓ′
s
)
,
(3)
after having solved all previous corresponding pricing subproblem for UAVs ℓ′ < ℓ.
As an example, for the ﬁrst delivery drone in Ds we will consider the best route that can pass
through any community in Cs. For the second delivery drone, though, we heuristically update Cs
as Cs \ C1
s, and then we further update Cs to Cs \
 C1
s ∪C2
s

, and so on.
This results in obtaining solutions to the pricing subproblems faster, as well as obtaining distinct
routes to use as columns in R-RMP, at the expense of higher route cost estimations.
3.5
Worst-case demand scenario generation
In this subsection, we discuss the scenario generation subproblem, which determines the worst-case
demand scenario for the current solution of the restricted main problem (R-RMP), the demand
distribution, and the uncertainty budget.
For every community c ∈C, let Qc be the average demand and let ˆQc be the maximum demand
deviation that can be experienced in that location. The average demand can be estimated from
census data that includes the number of people in a community, their socioeconomic information,
their age. On the other hand, ˆQc is dictated by the origin of stochasticity in the problem. For
example, disaster type, severity, or movement direction/progression will aﬀect the deviations we
expect in post-disaster aid demand.
We deﬁne yc as a binary variable that indicates whether
a community c experiences this maximum deviation in demand. We also deﬁne Γ as the total
uncertainty budget, as in the number of communities that can experience maximum deviations in
demand simultaneously.
Finally, we assume that the aﬀected area can be divided into a set of geographical regions A.
We group the communities that fall in a region (i.e., are located within their boundary) in Ca, such
that C = S
a∈A
Ca and Ca ∩Ca′ = ∅for a̸ = a′. Now, we similarly deﬁne Γa for every geographical
region a ∈A as the uncertainty budget per geographical region. Introducing geographical regions,
their associated boundaries, and individual uncertainty budgets Γa for them, is necessary in the
disaster management setting, as the impact of a disaster can vary signiﬁcantly depending on the
disaster characteristics and the location of a community. For example, depending on the direction
and speed of movement of a hurricane, some areas may face the full-force of the devastation, while
others may remain relatively safe.
The uncertainty set can be written as:
UQ =
(
Q ∈R|C| : ˜Qc = Qc + yc ˆQc, yc ∈{0, 1} ∀c ∈C,
X
c∈C
yc ≤Γ,
X
c∈Ca
yc ≤Γa, ∀a ∈A
)
.
Since our problem has simple recourse, the second stage problem for determining the most violated
scenarios can be formulated as a maximization problem. The optimal solution of the problem is
denoted by OPT(ΓQ).
13

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
Letting ˜Qc = Qc + yc ˆQc and introducing Ψsℓ
c
= max
ω∈Ω′
P
p∈Vs
zsℓ
p dωp
sc (i.e., the maximum amount
delivered at community c ∈C by a UAV ℓ∈Ds following a route p ∈Vs starting from satellite
s ∈S over all current scenarios ω ∈Ω′), we have the following max-min problem for generating the
worst-case scenario for the current solution:
OPT(ΓQ) = max
˜Q∈UQ
min
Rc
X
c∈C
F D
c Rc
(4a)
s.t.
Rc +
X
s∈S
X
ℓ∈Ds
Ψsℓ
c ≥Qc + ˆQc,
∀c ∈C,
(4b)
Rc ≥0,
∀c ∈C.
(4c)
We observe that this bilevel formulation can be rewritten as a single maximization problem by
dualizing the inner minimization problem. Let πc be the dual variables corresponding to constraints
(4b). By the deﬁnition of the uncertainty set UQ we have that ˜Qc = Qc + yc ˆQc, which results in
non-linearity due to the quantity ycπc in the dualized inner problem. Hence, we introduce δc = ycπc
and the corresponding linearization constraints (see (5d)–(5g)) to obtain the ﬁnal mixed integer
linear program of (5):
max
X
c∈C

Qcπc + δc ˆQc

−
X
s∈S
X
ℓ∈Ds
X
c∈C
πcΨsℓ
c
(5a)
s.t.
X
c∈Ca
yc ≤Γa,
∀a ∈A,
(5b)
X
c∈C
yc ≤Γ,
(5c)
πc ≤F D
c ,
∀c ∈C,
(5d)
δc ≤πc,
∀c ∈C,
(5e)
δc ≤F D
c yc,
∀c ∈C,
(5f)
δc ≥πc −F D
c (1 −yc) ,
∀c ∈C,
(5g)
yc ∈{0, 1} , πc ≥0, δc ≥0,
∀c ∈C.
(5h)
3.6
Algorithm
We ﬁnish this subsection by recounting the steps on how the framework is solved. We also present
a schematic ﬂow diagram of the algorithmic steps in Figure 7.
Step 1
We initialize an iteration counter (n), a lower (LB) and an upper bound (UB), and
provide an initial scenario set (Ω′). Speciﬁcally, we set n = 1, LB = 0, UB = +∞, and Ω′ = ˆΩ,
where ˆΩrepresents a scenario where each community has its average demand level Qc. We also
generate an initial set of feasible routes for the delivery drones and add them to Vs, ∀s ∈S.
Step 2
We relax the variable integrality restrictions and solve a relaxed version of the restricted
main problem (R-RMP from subsection 3.3) with the current set of routes Vs and the current set
of scenarios Ω′. Solving, we obtain the duals θs, φsℓ, ξc, ρsℓ, αsc, βω
c .
14

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
Figure 7: A schematic representation of the algorithm used to solve the robust 2EVRP problem
we are tackling in our framework.
Step 3
We solve the pricing subproblem (from subsection 3.4) for each satellite s ∈S and each
delivery drone ℓ∈Ds using the current scenario set Ω′ and the most recently obtained dual variable
values. As described in subsection 3.4, we solve the subproblem for each drone in set Ds and update
Cs as in (3) until either Cs = ∅or we have generated md routes. If ∃s, ℓsuch that RCsℓ≥0 (i.e.,
with desired reduced cost), we add the corresponding routes to Vs in R-RMP.
Step 4
If RCsℓ≥0 for every s ∈S, ℓ∈Ds, then we go to Step 5. Otherwise, assuming there
exists some ˆs, ˆℓsuch that RCˆsˆℓ< 0, we go back to Step 2 and resolve with the updated restricted
set of routes Vs.
Step 5
We solve the relaxed R-RMP again, but now with the updated restricted route set Vs
and the current scenario set Ω′. The main problem is now solved using the relax-and-ﬁx heuristic.
First, we solve by relaxing the variables for the delivery drones (z space) and obtain the binary
solution for the truck routes (x space). Next, we ﬁx the solutions for x and we solve with the
integrality of z restored. The solutions to z are used to update Ψsℓ
c as Ψsℓ
c = max
ω∈Ω′
P
p∈Vs
zsℓ
p dωp
sc . The
optimal objective function value for the restricted main problem is used as our new lower bound
now, i.e.,
LB =
X
s∈S
X
c∈C
F T
c T d
sc +
X
c∈C
F R
c Jc + Y.
Step 6
We move to the second stage and solve the scenario generation subproblem. The obtained
optimal objective function value OPT(ΓQ) is used to update the upper bound as follows:
UB ←min
(
UB,
X
s∈S
X
c∈C
F T
c T d
sc +
X
c∈C
F R
c Jc + OPT(ΓQ)
)
.
15

--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
Step 7
We now check our termination criterion based on the current values for our bounds.
Speciﬁcally, we separate our discussion in two parts, depending on UB −LB.
Step 7a
For the current bounds, if UB −LB > ϵ, where ϵ is a user-deﬁned tolerance
parameter, then the new demand scenario ω is added to Ω′. The corresponding demand of this
scenario is given by Qω
c = Qc + yc ˆQc. A new column is added for the variables Rω
c and new rows
are added according to constraints (1k)–(1l), and we go back to Step 2.
Step 7b
If UB −LB ≤ϵ, then the solutions with the current scenario set Ω′ are the ﬁnal
robust truck and drone scheduling and routing decisions that can cover the worst-case demand
scenario for the given demand distribution and uncertainty budget at minimum cost.
4
Results
As mentioned in the Introduction, we are motivated by the humanitarian relief operations that need
to take place in an area with numerous failures in its transportation, power, and communication
networks. Hence, we present the applicability of our framework with a small case study based
on generated data simulating emergency aid demand in the island of Puerto Rico after Hurricane
Maria. In the following sections, we discuss our data generation process; we present our ﬁndings on
computational runtime and measures of success of the operations, and perform a sensitivity analysis
on drone parameters, i.e., the number of drones per truck and the drone ﬂying range capability.
4.1
Data generation
We use the same datasets and data generation process as in [17]; that said, we introduce new
parameters that are necessary to evaluate the robust framework. Speciﬁcally, we solve problems
with number of communities |C| ∈{60, 80, 100, 120}. Each community represents a zip code of
Puerto Rico. Since there are 173 zip codes in total, for each diﬀerent problem size (i.e., diﬀerent
value of |C|) we randomly select out of those 173 zip codes. After selecting the communities that will
have failed communications, we obtain average demand quantities Qc by normalizing the zip code
population into a range of [2, 15] units. Finally, the maximum demand deviation that community
c can experience, ˆQc is set at 0.5Qc, i.e., 50% of the expected demand.
For the truck and drone details, we assume that mt = 4 (that is, 4 trucks), but we let md be
equal to 6, 9, 10, and 14 drones per truck for the diﬀerent problem sizes (60, 80, 100, and 120
aﬀected communities, respectively). Lmax, the maximum allowed carry load is set at 25 units; W d,
the ﬂying range, is set at 35 miles. That said, we do investigate the eﬀect of the number of drones
per truck in subsection 4.3.1 as well as the range W d in subsection 4.3.2. All distances that the
drones traverse are calculated based on the corresponding endpoints geodesic distances (“as the
crow ﬂies”). Both truck and drone velocities are deterministic and equal to 60 miles per hour.
We note here that drone velocities are not deterministic, nor constant, and rely on the weather
conditions among other environmental characteristics. Velocities and ranges have been identiﬁed
as important future research avenues in the literature [42] and in our future work recommendations
in Section 5.
We then discuss cost selection. We have three costs associated with our operations: (a) delivery
delay cost F T
c
which is set at $1/minute, (b) failure to reach a community F R
c
which is set at
$10000/community, and (c) failure to fulﬁll all of the demand in a community F D
c which is randomly
generated in $ [10, 1000] per unit for each community. This aims to address that some items are
very important (e.g., epi-pens) and failing to fulﬁll them will have more serious repercussions.
We ﬁnish the data description with the uncertainty budget. We consider Γ ∈{30%, 50%, 70%}.
For the individual geographical region uncertainty budget Γa, ∀a ∈A, we divide Puerto Rico into
16

--- PDF PAGE 17 ---
10 mutually exclusive subregions based on the longitudinal values (from east to west) and then set
Γa = 50% for each subregion.
4.2
Numerical experiments
We implemented the framework using AMPL and CPLEX. We use a Dual Intel Xeon Processor (12
Core, 2.3GHz Turbo) computer with 64 GB of RAM. Furthermore, for each community size (|C|)
and budget uncertainty (Γ), we generate 5 instances at random. We present the mean and standard
deviation of our results from all of these experiments in Table 1. We present ﬁve interesting metrics
for the performance of our framework:
1. CPU Time (in seconds) reveals the computational time required.
2. # Scenarios presents the number of scenarios that are generated to identify the optimal robust
decisions.
3. Cost (in $) is the objective function value obtained.
4. Unﬁlﬁlled demand (in %) keeps track of the demand that was unfulﬁlled after performing the
robust routes.
5. Delay (in minutes) shows the time it takes until a community is reached.
For all the metrics, we present both the average from 5 experiments as well as the standard devia-
tion.
Table 1: A summary of the results from the numerical experiment for diﬀerent number of aﬀected
communities (|C|) and uncertainty budget (Γ). For all results, we show the average and standard
deviations from 5 diﬀerent runs.
Instance
CPU time (sec)
# Scenarios
Cost ($)
Unfulﬁlled
demand (%)
Delay (min)
|C|
Γ (%)
µ
σ
µ
σ
µ
σ
µ
σ
µ
σ
60
30
1131.67
786.37
4.33
0.47
11112.17
6355.38
5.15
5.42
63.33
8.87
50
784.33
515.94
3.50
0.50
8919.17
3538.31
3.65
3.38
57.75
11.50
70
526.50
325.08
3.17
0.37
8467.50
5226.64
3.30
4.36
60.04
13.93
80
30
2504.83
789.42
4.17
0.37
11571.50
2545.54
4.61
2.01
71.56
7.58
50
1024.17
320.07
3.00
0.00
9226.17
2982.80
2.56
2.53
72.58
8.17
70
1141.00
320.88
3.17
0.37
9232.00
2412.41
2.59
1.89
73.55
9.03
100
30
4050.00
1643.08
4.33
0.47
12252.00
1320.08
3.12
0.75
100.04
11.69
50
1812.33
581.74
3.00
0.00
9649.67
1739.32
1.42
0.91
92.08
9.98
70
1773.67
531.38
3.17
0.37
9490.00
1838.55
1.38
0.98
90.88
8.61
120
30
5417.33
1580.40
4.17
0.69
16341.50
954.90
3.46
1.45
131.52
34.06
50
3712.33
1362.32
3.17
0.37
11204.83
1934.51
1.33
0.98
120.13
19.60
70
3907.83
1615.97
3.33
0.75
11561.67
2780.54
1.43
1.18
120.74
29.48
We see that in all of our experiments, the number of scenarios required before we can identify
the optimal robust decisions is very small, both on average and when considering the deviations.
We also observe that problem instance size does not really play a role in the number of scenarios
generated.
17

--- PDF PAGE 18 ---
Figure 8: The four (geographically organized) randomly generated instances for the: (a) northwest-
ern part, (b) northeastern part, (c) southwestern part, and (d) southeastern part of Puerto Rico.
In addition, all three metrics (cost of operations, proportion of unfulﬁlled demand, delay in
reaching a community) all decrease as the uncertainty budget increases. Here, average proportion
of unfulﬁlled demand is calculated by taking the average of unfulﬁlled demand proportions in all
considered scenarios. More speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that an uncertainty budget of 30% results in higher
values for all these metrics. When the uncertainty budget is 50% and 70%, the diﬀerence between
the average values for total cost, proportion of unfulﬁlled demand, and average delay time is very
small. This is attributed to the area uncertainty budget Γa, which is set at 50%.
4.3
Sensitivity analysis
We also design experiments to investigate the eﬀect of drone parameters on the routing decisions
and the metrics identiﬁed earlier (operational cost, proportion of unfulﬁlled demand, delay to
community). Speciﬁcally, we want to investigate whether more drones per truck would result in
faster, more eﬃcient operations. We also investigate whether the ﬂying range of the drones is an
important parameter.
To do that, we focus on |C| = 60 communities per instance and generate 5 diﬀerent instances,
per geographical region. The ﬁrst four instances are randomly generated by selecting communi-
ties across Puerto Rico, however with higher probability in speciﬁc areas at a time.
The four
instances focus on the: (a) northwestern part of the island, (b) northeastern part of the island,
(c) southwestern part of the island, and (d) southeastern part of the island, respectively.
The
instances generated for this experiment are presented in Figure 8. The ﬁfth instance is constructed
by randomly selecting locations without any geographical preference (i.e., all locations are equally
probably selected).
We also introduce a new attribute, i.e., disaster level to represent the disaster impact/strength,
which in turn controls the maximum demand deviation a geographical area can experience. For
simplicity, we only consider three levels of disaster impact. In the ﬁrst level (Level 1), commu-
nities can experience maximum deviation that is 50% of the average demand irrespective of their
geographical locations. In Levels 2 and 3, the geographical location of a community dictates the
18

--- PDF PAGE 19 ---
Figure 9: Variation in average unfulﬁlled demand and average delay to reach a community as the
number of delivery drones per truck changes.
maximum deviation that it can experience. We use the same 10 geographical areas introduced ear-
lier (i.e., Puerto Rico consists of 10 mutually exclusive subregions based on the longitudinal values).
In disaster level 2, the highest demand deviation (90% of the average demand) is experienced by
the eastern-most area, and it gradually decreases (by 10% from one area to the next) from east to
west, with the least deviation (0% of the nominal demand) being experienced by the western-most
area. In disaster level 3, we reverse the direction. Then, we set the area uncertainty budget Γa at
100%, which indicates that every community in geographical area a can experience simultaneous
demand deviation in a scenario.
4.3.1
Impact of number of drones per truck
We test three cases for the number of drones per truck: md = 4, md = 6, and md = 8. The main
result is that (as expected), as the number of drones per truck increase, all metrics improve. That
said, it is interesting to note that the rate of improvement depends on the disaster impact level and
the uncertainty budget.
Speciﬁcally, in Figure 9, we observe that the rate of decrease in the average unfulﬁlled demand
with the number of delivery drones is very similar for Levels 2 and 3. However, for disaster level
2, a higher proportion of demand is unfulﬁlled. This is due to geography of Puerto Rico, where a
bigger population lives in communities in the eastern areas. As a reminder, disaster level 2 results
in higher demand deviations in these areas.
We also observe a slight diﬀerence in the rate of decrease in unfulﬁlled demand between un-
certainty budget of 30% and 70% in Figures 9(a) and 9(c). When the uncertainty budget is equal
to 30%, we see a decrease in the average proportion of unfulﬁlled demand when increasing the
19

--- PDF PAGE 20 ---
number of drones from 4 to 6. That said, adding more drones per truck only slightly reduce the
unfulﬁlled demand. We discussed earlier that lower uncertainty budget results in higher number of
scenarios to be generated, where each scenario is characterized by fewer communities experiencing
demand deviation. This results in demand scenarios, where fulﬁlment is more constrained by the
drone ﬂying range rather than by the drone load capacity. Without increasing the ﬂying range,
additional drones only slightly improve the demand fulﬁlment.
However, we see in Figure 9(b) that there is a reduction in the average delay in reaching
communities as we increase the number of drones. Again, we see diﬀerent rates of decrease in
the average delay: for disaster level 3, where communities in the western areas experience higher
demand deviation, the rate of decrease is very small.
This is because the communities in the
western areas are sparsely located and farther apart. Hence, they require longer times to reach
from nearby satellite stations. This is why increasing the number of drones does not necessarily
result in a reduction in the average delay time. In contrast, for disaster level 2, more densely packed
communities experience higher demand deviation and with the increase of number of drones comes
a large reduction in the average delay to reach a community. For the case of uncertainty budget
equal to 70%, few scenarios with communities experiencing high demand deviation are generated.
The resulting demand scenarios are more constrained by drone load capacity than by ﬂying range.
As the number of drones is increased from 4 to 6, the proportion of unfulﬁlled demand and the
average delay time both decreases. The proportion of unfulﬁlled demand is close to 0% when more
drones are added while the corresponding average delay time remains almost unchanged.
4.3.2
Impact of range of drones
We also study the eﬀect of drone ﬂying range on the average proportion of unfulﬁlled demand and
average delay time and we present our ﬁndings in Figures 10 and 11. We note that when the number
of delivery drones carried by each truck is ﬁxed, the proportion of unfulﬁlled demand decreases as
we increase the drone ﬂying range.
When using 8 drones per truck, both disaster levels 2 and 3 (as seen in Figures 10(a) and 10(c))
reveal that the proportion of unfulﬁlled demand remains higher for the 30% budget uncertainty
cases as compared to the 70% uncertainty budget cases. This is consistent with our explanations
and ﬁndings in Figure 9. Comparing Figures 10(b) and 10(d), we also observe that the average delay
in reaching communities decreases with the increase in drone ﬂying range. The rate of increase
is higher in the case of uncertainty budget of 30% and disaster level 2. We also ﬁnd that once
the average unfulﬁlled proportion of demand reaches 0%, the average delay time remains almost
unchanged even when the drone ﬂying range is increased. This is a similar ﬁnding to our observation
when investigating the number of drones per truck in subsection 4.3.1.
The diﬀerence between cases with uncertainty budget 30% and 70% in terms of the average
proportion of unfulﬁlled demand is evident in Figure 10, where we used 8 delivery drones in each
truck. When we change the number of drones per truck, and use 6 delivery drones instead of 8, the
diﬀerence is made even smaller, as revealed pictorially in Figure 11.
In Figures 11(b) and 11(d), we see that the average delay time decreases as the ﬂying range
increases, whereas an uncertainty budget of 30% leads to larger average delays to reach communities.
However, we also ﬁnd that the diﬀerence between average proportions of unfulﬁlled demand given
by 30% and 70% uncertainty budgets is smaller than the case with 8 delivery drones in each truck.
For both disaster level 2 in Figure 11(a), and disaster level 3 in Figure 11(c), as the average
unfulﬁlled proportion of demand decreases, we observe the corresponding increase in the average
delay in reaching communities.
20

--- PDF PAGE 21 ---
Figure 10: Variation in average unfulﬁlled demand and average delay with delivery drone ﬂying
range (8 delivery drones per truck).
Figure 11: Variation in average unfulﬁlled demand and average delay with delivery drone ﬂying
range (6 delivery drones per truck).
21

--- PDF PAGE 22 ---
5
Conclusions
In this work, we study a variant of the two-echelon vehicle routing problem (2EVRP) with UAVs
or drones with uncertain demand, a feature that is very useful in the context of humanitarian
logistics in the aftermath of a disaster. The lack of stable infrastructure (transportation, power,
communications) makes both reaching and identifying aﬀected communities very diﬃcult. Following
a disaster, the demand for emergency supplies (including small medical kits, epi-pens, dry food and
water) is uncertain in our setup. And, even if we were able to obtain exact demands, reaching
populations is a hurdle when the transportation network is failing. Our work successfully addresses
both these issues faced by humanitarian logistics providers.
To handle this special case of humanitarian aid delivery problem, we propose a unique 2EVRP
framework, where trucks (the ﬁrst echelon vehicles) carrying drones travel along the still functional
roads of the transportation network and make intermittent stops at designated locations (satellites).
When a truck stops at one of those designated locations, delivery drones (the second echelon
vehicles) are dispatched for aid package deliveries in the disaster aﬀected communities.
We develop a novel computational framework to handle the demand uncertainty in the resulting
2EVRP. In the proposed framework, we design a two-stage robust computational approach. We
develop a column-and-constraint-generation approach for worst case demand scenario generation
for a given truck and drone routing decision. Moreover, we also develop a CG-based decomposition
scheme and heuristic to generate drone routes for a set of demand scenarios eﬃciently. We combine
the column generation scheme within a column-and-constraint-generation approach to determine
robust decisions regarding truck and drone routes, time to visit communities, and the quantities of
aid materials delivered in these communities.
We validate our framework with real-world size dataset that simulates the demand for emer-
gency aid in diﬀerent areas in Puerto Rico after a disaster. From our numerical experiments, we
gather managerial insights into the impacts of various parameters on two of the most important
measures of eﬃciency in post-disaster emergency aid delivery operations: the average proportion of
unfulﬁlled demand and the average delay in reaching demand locations. Our framework and com-
putational experiments will help humanitarian logistics providers in making decisions considering
the geospatial impact of a disaster and the population density distribution of the disaster aﬀected
region. Humanitarian organizations can also build upon our framework to incorporate problem
speciﬁc characteristics, for example, prioritizing expedient aid delivery, ensuring equity, etc. into
the decision making.
In our 2EVRP framework, we consider only one source of uncertainty, i.e., demand for emergency
aid at the aﬀected communities. During real-world humanitarian logistics operations, several other
parameters are of a stochastic nature. For example, we consider the ﬂying time range and load
carrying capacities of drones as deterministic.
These two properties of drones are signiﬁcantly
impacted by weather conditions during delivery operations and have been identiﬁed as important
future work avenues in the literature (see, e.g., [42]). We plan to extend our study by incorporating
uncertain weather conditions in terms of stochastic ﬂying range and load carrying capacity of drones
in future work.
References
[1] N. Agatz, P. Bouman, and M. Schmidt, Optimization approaches for the traveling salesman
problem with drone, Transp. Sci. 52 (2018), 965–981.
[2] R. Banomyong, P. Varadejsatitwong, and R. Oloruntoba, A systematic review of humanitarian
22

--- PDF PAGE 23 ---
operations, humanitarian logistics and humanitarian supply chain performance literature 2005
to 2016, Ann. Oper. Res. 283 (2019), 71–86.
[3] B. Behdani and J.C. Smith, An integer-programming-based approach to the close-enough trav-
eling salesman problem, INFORMS J. Comput. 26 (2014), 415–432.
[4] R.W. Bent and P. Van Hentenryck, Scenario-based planning for partially dynamic vehicle
routing with stochastic customers, Oper. Res. 52 (2004), 977–987.
[5] P. Bouman, N. Agatz, and M. Schmidt, Dynamic programming approaches for the traveling
salesman problem with drone, Networks 72 (2018), 528–542.
[6] U. Breunig, V. Schmid, R.F. Hartl, and T. Vidal, A large neighbourhood based heuristic for
two-echelon routing problems, Comput. Oper. Res. 76 (2016), 208–225.
[7] A.M. Campbell and B.W. Thomas, Probabilistic traveling salesman problem with deadlines,
Transp. Sci. 42 (2008), 1–21.
[8] A.M. Caunhye, X. Nie, and S. Pokharel, Optimization models in emergency logistics: A liter-
ature review, Socio-economic planning sciences 46 (2012), 4–13.
[9] Y.S. Chang and H.J. Lee, Optimal delivery routing with wider drone-delivery areas along a
shorter truck-route, Expert Syst. with Appl. 104 (2018), 307–317.
[10] Z.L. Chen and H. Xu, Dynamic column generation for dynamic vehicle routing with time
windows, Transp. Sci. 40 (2006), 74–88.
[11] T.G. Crainic, N. Ricciardi, and G. Storchi, Models for evaluating and planning city logistics
systems, Transp. Sci. 43 (2009), 432–454.
[12] R. Cuda, G. Guastaroba, and M.G. Speranza, A survey on two-echelon routing problems,
Comput. Oper. Res. 55 (2015), 185–199.
[13] J.R. Current and D.A. Schilling, The covering salesman problem, Transp. Sci. 23 (1989), 208–
213.
[14] M. Dell’Amico, R. Montemanni, and S. Novellani, Modeling the ﬂying sidekick traveling sales-
man problem with multiple drones, Networks 78 (2021), 303–327.
[15] L. Di Puglia Pugliese, G. Macrina, and F. Guerriero, Trucks and drones cooperation in the
last-mile delivery process, Networks 78 (2021), 371–399.
[16] T.I. Faiz, C. Vogiatzis, and M. Noor-E-Alam, A column generation algorithm for vehicle
scheduling and routing problems, Comput. Indus. Eng. 130 (2019), 222–236.
[17] T.I. Faiz,
C. Vogiatzis,
and M. Noor-E-Alam,
Computational approaches for solving
two-echelon vehicle and UAV routing problems for post-disaster humanitarian operations,
https://arxiv.org/abs/2001.06456 (2022).
[18] Federal Communications Commission, 2018. Hurricane Maria. Accessed: 2018-01-11.
[19] M. Gendreau, G. Laporte, and R. S´eguin, An exact algorithm for the vehicle routing problem
with stochastic demands and customers, Transp. Sci. 29 (1995), 143–155.
23

--- PDF PAGE 24 ---
[20] M. Gendreau, G. Laporte, and F. Semet, The covering tour problem, Oper. Res. 45 (1997),
568–576.
[21] Z. Ghelichi, M. Gentili, and P.B. Mirchandani, Logistics for a ﬂeet of drones for medical item
delivery: A case study for louisville, ky, Comput. Oper. Res. 135 (2021), 105443.
[22] B. Golden, Z. Naji-Azimi, S. Raghavan, M. Salari, and P. Toth, The generalized covering
salesman problem, INFORMS J. Comput. 24 (2012), 534–553.
[23] J. Gonzalez-Feliu, G. Perboli, R. Tadei, and D. Vigo, The two-echelon capacitated vehicle
routing problem, Tech. report, HAL, 2008.
[24] D.J. Gulczynski, J.W. Heath, and C.C. Price, The close enough traveling salesman problem:
A discussion of several heuristics, Perspectives Oper. Res. (2006), 271–283.
[25] Q.M. Ha, Y. Deville, Q.D. Pham, and M.H. H˜A , On the min-cost traveling salesman problem
with drone, Transp. Res. Part C: Emerging Technologies 86 (2018), 597–621.
[26] V.C. Hemmelmayr, J.F. Cordeau, and T.G. Crainic, An adaptive large neighborhood search
heuristic for two-echelon vehicle routing problems arising in city logistics, Comput. operations
research 39 (2012), 3215–3228.
[27] L.M. Hvattum, A. Løkketangen, and G. Laporte, Solving a dynamic and stochastic vehicle
routing problem with a sample scenario hedging heuristic, Transp. Sci. 40 (2006), 421–438.
[28] M. Jepsen, S. Spoorendonk, and S. Ropke, A branch-and-cut algorithm for the symmetric
two-echelon capacitated vehicle routing problem, Transp. Sci. 47 (2013), 23–37.
[29] P. Kitjacharoenchai, M. Ventresca, M. Moshref-Javadi, S. Lee, J.M. Tanchoco, and P.A.
Brunese, Multiple traveling salesman problem with drones: Mathematical model and heuris-
tic approach, Comput. Indus. Eng. 129 (2019), 14–30.
[30] G. Kov´acs and K.M. Spens, Humanitarian logistics in disaster relief operations, Int. journal
physical distribution logistics management (2007).
[31] A. Leiras, I. de Brito Jr, E.Q. Peres, T.R. Bertazzo, and H.T.Y. Yoshizaki, Literature review of
humanitarian logistics research: trends and challenges, J. Humanitarian Logist. Supply Chain
Manage. (2014).
[32] R. Liu, Y. Tao, Q. Hu, and X. Xie, Simulation-based optimisation approach for the stochastic
two-echelon logistics problem, Int. J. Production Res. 55 (2017), 187–201.
[33] T. Liu, Z. Luo, H. Qin, and A. Lim, A branch-and-cut algorithm for the two-echelon capacitated
vehicle routing problem with grouping constraints, Eur. J. Oper. Res. 266 (2018), 487–497.
[34] Los Angeles Times, 2017. In one Puerto Rico mountain town, a wall of mud came crashing
down. Accessed: 2018-01-12.
[35] A. Masone, S. Poikonen, and B.L. Golden, The multivisit drone routing problem with edge
launches: An iterative approach with discrete and continuous improvements, Networks (2022).
[36] C.C. Murray and A.G. Chu, The ﬂying sidekick traveling salesman problem: Optimization of
drone-assisted parcel delivery, Transp. Res. Part C: Emerging Technologies 54 (2015), 86–109.
24

--- PDF PAGE 25 ---
[37] L. ¨Ozdamar and O. Demir, A hierarchical clustering and routing procedure for large scale
disaster relief logistics planning, Transp. Res. Part E: Logist. Transp. Review 48 (2012), 591–
602.
[38] L. ¨Ozdamar, E. Ekinci, and B. K¨u¸c¨ukyazici, Emergency logistics planning in natural disasters,
Ann. operations research 129 (2004), 217–245.
[39] G. Perboli and R. Tadei, New families of valid inequalities for the two-echelon vehicle routing
problem, Electron. notes discrete mathematics 36 (2010), 639–646.
[40] G. Perboli, R. Tadei, and E. Fadda, New valid inequalities for the two-echelon capacitated
vehicle routing problem, Electron. notes discrete mathematics 64 (2018), 75–84.
[41] G. Perboli, R. Tadei, and D. Vigo, The two-echelon capacitated vehicle routing problem: Models
and math-based heuristics, Transp. Sci. 45 (2011), 364–380.
[42] S. Poikonen and J.F. Campbell, Future directions in drone routing research, Networks 77
(2021), 116–126.
[43] S. Poikonen and B. Golden, The mothership and drone routing problem, INFORMS J. Comput.
32 (2020), 249–262.
[44] S. Poikonen and B. Golden, Multi-visit drone routing problem, Comput. Oper. Res. 113 (2020),
104802.
[45] S. Poikonen, B. Golden, and E.A. Wasil, A branch-and-bound approach to the traveling sales-
man problem with a drone, INFORMS J. Comput. 31 (2019), 335–346.
[46] S. Poikonen, X. Wang, and B. Golden, The vehicle routing problem with drones: Extended
models and connections, Networks 70 (2017), 34–43.
[47] F.A. Santos, A.S. da Cunha, and G.R. Mateus, Branch-and-price algorithms for the two-
echelon capacitated vehicle routing problem, Optim. Lett. 7 (2013), 1537–1547.
[48] F.A. Santos, G.R. Mateus, and A.S. da Cunha, A branch-and-cut-and-price algorithm for the
two-echelon capacitated vehicle routing problem, Transp. Sci. 49 (2015), 355–368.
[49] D. Schermer, M. Moeini, and O. Wendt, A branch-and-cut approach and alternative formula-
tions for the traveling salesman problem with drone, Networks 76 (2020), 164–186.
[50] I. Sungur, Y. Ren, F. Ord´o˜nez, M. Dessouky, and H. Zhong, A model and algorithm for the
courier delivery problem with uncertainty, Transp. Sci. 44 (2010), 193–205.
[51] S.A. Voccia, A.M. Campbell, and B.W. Thomas, The probabilistic traveling salesman problem
with time windows, EURO J. Transp. Logist. 2 (2013), 89–107.
[52] K. Wang, S. Lan, and Y. Zhao, A genetic-algorithm-based approach to the two-echelon capac-
itated vehicle routing problem with stochastic demands in logistics service, J. Oper. Res. Soc.
68 (2017), 1409–1421.
[53] X. Wang, S. Poikonen, and B. Golden, The vehicle routing problem with drones: Several worst-
case results, Optim. Lett. 11 (2017), 679–697.
[54] Washington Post, 2017. Parts of Puerto Rico have been in the dark. Accessed: 2017-12-26.
25
