--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
 UNICEF  GUIDANCE ON 
 THE  USE OF  DRONES 
 IN  SUPPLY CHAINS 

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
© UN0259812 Jason Chute

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
Table of contents
1. Rationale, applicability and scope
2. Use cases and prerequisites
3. Drone technology considerations
4. Drone delivery as a service
5. Procurement of drone delivery and logistics services	
6. Additional resources 	
04
05
07
10
13
15

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
4
1. Rationale, applicability
and scope
1. Rationale, applicability
and scope
An uncrewed aircraft system (UAS), commonly known as a drone, is a remotely piloted air­
craft system without a pilot on board, which can be pre-programmed to perform automated 
or autonomous flights. This innovative technology provides organizations and governments 
with a new tool for in-country delivery of health commodities in access-constrained situ­
ations. Drones can also help quickly collect aerial data for emergency preparedness and 
response. 
With the growing interest of governments, donors and humanitarian organizations in UAS, 
there is a need to strengthen the knowledge, operational practices and support mecha­
nisms that enable UNICEF and partners to source and procure appropriate drone logistics 
services.
The purpose of this guidance document is to provide UNICEF partners with a resource for 
implementing and procuring drone logistics services for the delivery of health products, 
emergency supplies and other commodities, either as a part of regular in-country logistics 
and programme delivery in access-constrained environments or in emergency settings.
The document presents the key use cases and considerations for drones, introduces differ­
ent service models and transport modalities, and provides guidance and tools for procuring 
drone delivery services.
Drones can be useful tools that fill existing gaps within the national health and emergency 
supply chains, especially in serving the most disadvantaged, remote, sparsely populated 
or otherwise underserved communities, areas and facilities. Drones have been used in 
geographies and contexts that have limited road and transport infrastructure, and where 
in-country commuting, delivery and distribution is challenging, taking a disproportionate 
amount of  time and effort. They have been used to deliver medical commodities and diag­
nostic samples to, and from, islands; hard-to-access (seasonally or year-round) rural health 
facilities; mountainous regions; and places affected by natural disasters. 
UNICEF works and provides technical support to partners and governments in strength­
ening their capacity to operate efficient supply chains. Drones can play a significant role in 
complementing the existing transport services by responding to supply-chain bottlenecks, 
such as access, time and speed. This guidance for drone delivery procurement and imple­
mentation can be applicable within the scope of partner-controlled supply chains. The use 
of drones will be context specific, based on actual needs and demands arising from the 
in-country supply chain challenges and problems.
Partners are advised to consult and actively work with ministries of health, central/regional 
medical stores, regional/local health authorities, aviation regulatory authorities and other 
stakeholders to discuss feasibility, preferences and use cases of a drone delivery service, 
and ensure that the integration of this new transport modality improves the overall system 
outcomes and is driven by national strategies.

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
5
2. Use cases and
prerequisites
2. Use cases and
prerequisites
This transformative technology has the potential to improve the way UNICEF and partners 
operate and support governments for in-country logistics and delivery of humanitarian aid, 
as summarized below: 
	
» Delivery of small cargo for health and emergency programmes. Drones can carry various 
health commodities (vaccines, medicines, diagnostic samples, blood products, medical 
products) and help extend the reach of the supply chain to communities and health 
centres that are in access-constrained areas, as part of either regular programming or 
emergency response. 
	
» Delivery of large cargo for emergency programmes. In emergency settings, drone plat­
forms can be used to deliver critical humanitarian aid to places that are inaccessible 
owing to natural disasters or other emergencies where road infrastructure is signifi­
cantly affected. The category of large payload drones is rapidly evolving and might be 
used for large air-drops of humanitarian aid. 
For drones to become a cost-effective and impactful addition to the supply chain system, 
several aspects must be considered before implementation:
	
»
A thorough understanding of the local supply chain system and its bottlenecks is 
essential for integrating drones into a context where their use contributes to supply 
chain performance, health outcomes, and cost-effectiveness or other improvements 
of local transportation and distribution networks. To do so, partners are encouraged 
to conduct a demand and needs assessment. This serves to determine the specific 
bottlenecks and helps to analyse in which scenarios drones could be used to address 
them. Such an assessment has to consider four different elements:  
	
— Geography and transport networks (such as climate, topography, seasonality, ex­
isting transport modalities, quality of the network, accessibility to health facilities, 
density of health facilities) 
	
— Product demand and health indicators (such as baseline data, including facility-level 
health and supply chain data) 
	
— Drone characteristics (such as range, payload, cost)
	
— Economic feasibility (such as cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness analysis of intro­
duction of drone delivery, cost comparison between drone delivery and existing 
transport solutions) 
	
» The use of drone technology in any country is dependent on an enabling environment, 
such as the regulatory regime, the local skills, project management capacities, financial 
and human resources, and the social and political acceptance of the technology. 
	
» Selection and procurement of the solution is an important step during the implemen­
tation of the drone logistics programme, and the subsequent guidance in this docu­
ment provides insights into the service models and transport modalities that currently 
exist, the procurement procedures that are advised to be followed, and the difference 

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
6
2. Use cases and
prerequisites
between outsourcing and insourcing of drone services. The guidance also provides 
sample Terms of Reference (see paragraph 28.2) for drone logistics services for the 
use of Country Offices.
Some factors help to improve the cost-effectiveness of drone delivery, such as:
	
» High number of flights per day
	
» High density of facilities within the drone’s range
	
» Increased value (health impact) of the commodities
	
» Increased range and automation of drones
	
» Combining different health commodities for drone delivery (therapeutic, immunization, 
diagnostics, emergency, and other health and nutritional commodities)
	
» Expanding the list of use cases beyond the health supply chain, such as potential 
cross-subsidization of drone delivery by other services, including mapping, emergency 
response, postal service, or similar
© UN013395 Bodele

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
7
3. Drone technology
considerations
3. Drone technology
considerations
The selection of drones depends on a use case, intended weight and volume of a payload, 
distance, connectivity, weather, and other operational factors. Drones come in varied sizes 
and configurations. There are primarily three types of drones used in supply chain delivery.
	
» Fixed-wing drones use a wing, like a normal aeroplane, to provide the lift, and are there­
fore more efficient than other types of drones. They can cover longer distances, but 
the main downside of fixed-wing drones is their inability to hover in one spot, which 
makes launching and landing them more complicated, as they might need a runway, 
catapult launcher or a special net to launch and recover them safely. In addition, they 
might require more operational infrastructure.
	
» Vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) fixed-wing drones merge the benefits of fixed-
wing drones with the ability to take off and land vertically, and hover in one spot. This 
category of drones can take off and land vertically, which gives them an important 
advantage in serving remote communities where landing a drone might be required.
	
» VTOL rotorcraft drones have more than two rotors; the advantage with this type of 
drone is the simpler rotor mechanics required for flight control. However, their limited 
endurance and speed make them less suitable for large-payload, long-distance delivery 
flights, and they are therefore used mainly for short-trip, local supply chain delivery.
Drones that are capable of VTOL are most often used for reverse logistics of commodities; 
i.e., delivering commodities by landing on the grounds of a destination facility, where it 
then picks up a package, which it returns to a main base. This design enables the drone 
to pick up, for instance, diagnostic samples from remote health clinics and deliver them 
to a diagnostics lab. Another advantage of VTOL drones is that they provide agwility and 
flexibility, meaning that a distribution facility does not need a specific launch and retrieval 
mechanism or runway, which might require higher set-up costs and might not be able to 
serve some areas. VTOL drones, nevertheless, can also deliver without landing – in such 
cases, a drone uses a cable to lower a payload, and after it reaches the ground, the cable 
retracted, and the drone returns to a home base. Some VTOL drones have multiple-drop 
functionality, delivering several packages to different locations in a single trip.
The fixed-wing drones mostly use parachute airdrop mechanisms to deliver commodities 
and goods without landing at a delivery site, as this would require special infrastructure at 
each destination (runway or a catapult/retrieve system). Fixed-wing drones that are capable 
of delivering commodities only one way can fly longer distances and can thus serve larger 
geographical areas. However, they have the limitation of not being able to pick up packages 
from a destination (e.g., diagnostic samples).
All types of drone (VTOL fixed-wing, VTOL rotorcraft, or fixed-wing) differ in range (dis­
tance, flight time) and payload capacity (volume and weight). They might also have different 
communication technologies and different tolerances to adverse weather.

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
8
3. Drone technology
considerations
The range and payload capabilities of drones are predetermined by their size and the 
power source they use. Most drones rely on electric engines that use lithium polymer 
(LiPo) batteries. Some drones have combustion engines that use regular fuel. There is an 
increasing trend toward using hydrogen fuel or other alternative sources of power that can 
extend the flight time and operational range of drones. Gasoline-powered drones provide 
greater range, which can lead to better cost-effectiveness; however, noise, pollution, and 
consistent supply and quality of fuel have to be considered when choosing such a platform. 
Battery-powered drones are more environmentally friendly; however, they have limitations 
in terms of range. Additionally, stable electricity supply, battery-charging capabilities and 
battery swapping at different destinations (e.g., health facility, outreach post) are important 
considerations to ensure that drones can operate without interruption. As battery technol­
ogy is improving, it is expected that in the future, the range gap will be closed between 
battery-powered and gasoline-powered drones.
An important consideration when choosing a drone platform is cold-chain capacity. Most 
to-date drone projects use passive cooling (insulated cargo boxes that use icepacks or 
cool water packs) to maintain vaccine temperatures (2-8 degrees Celsius) during flights. 
Evidence shows  that passive cooling has been sufficient to maintain cold chains within 
acceptable limits. Temperature loggers are often used to monitor the temperature inside 
the box. Active cooling systems could also be used as a cold-chain solution and could be 
particularly important in ultra-cold-chain scenarios.
	
» Maintenance and repairs: Given that the overall supply chain in resource-constrained 
environments is challenging, it often takes an exceptionally long time to get spare parts 
for drones from outside a country. Therefore, systems that have low-maintenance 
requirements, a low operational footprint, and spare parts that are easily available (or 
VTOL fixed-wing (up) and VTOL rotorcraft 
(down) drones that are capable of reverse 
logistics (delivery and pick-up)
Delivery and Pick-up
Delivery only
Fixed-wing drone capable of one-way 
logistics (delivery only) 

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
9
3. Drone technology
considerations
can even be sourced or produced locally) have huge advantages. Also, it is especially 
important to ensure that there is a robust training programme for repairs and mainte­
nance of a drone to ensure that local staff can efficiently maintain it.
	
» User interface: Drones vary in how difficult they are to operate, but those that have 
built-in fail-safe features and user-friendly interfaces have advantages in ensuring that 
local staff can quickly learn how to operate them safely and efficiently.
	
» Flight control and navigation: It is important that a drone has robust and redundant 
navigation and other flight control systems (GPS, inertia measurement unit [IMU], and 
other) to ensure that it can maintain its orientation even under frequency jamming or 
other technical anomalies.
	
» Control and Command (C2) link: This is the data link between a drone and a remote 
pilot station for the purpose of managing flight. The design, security and management 
of the C2 link have a variety of architectures and considerations, and given limitations 
of regular (or extended range) radio links, more platforms use cellular and satellite links. 
The quality of the link in such situations depends heavily on cellular network coverage, 
while satellite connections are still more expensive and usually employed as a stable 
backup. Drones that can operate in low-connectivity environments and provide redun­
dant C2 link solutions have an advantage.
	
» Durability: A drone’s ability to withstand harsh weather conditions (capable of flight 
in rain or high wind, at high altitudes and in sub-zero temperatures, and are not 
suscetible to dust) is an important aspect when evaluating a platform. The best practice 
is to look at the platform’s Ingress Protection (IP) rating, as well as a provider’s flight 
safety record, to determine the level of a drone’s durability.







--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
10
3. Drone technology
considerations
4. Drone delivery as a service 
There are two main drone delivery modalities: forward logistics and reverse logistics.
One-way delivery (forward logistics) is often implemented by fixed-wing drones that do 
not land at the delivery site, but instead drop a payload to a recipient (e.g., health facility 
staff). This modality is most effective in a hub-and-spoke transport network, where several 
different beneficiaries (health facilities, households) are served from one central fulfilment 
centre. In such cases, the required infrastructure (a warehouse, a fulfilment centre, a launch/
retrieval system, etc.) can either be attached to the existing hub (district hospital, subnation­
al-level medical store or similar facility) or be a separate fulfilment and distribution centre. 
Reverse logistics utilize VTOL fixed-wing or VTOL rotorcraft drones. This modality can 
function in both hub-and-spoke and point-to-point transport network models. Variations 
and extensions of those are possible because of the drones’ capacity to land and take off at 
each destination, and the ability to use multiple-drop or winch mechanisms. For fixed-wing 
drones to be used for reverse logistics, infrastructure must be built at each delivery point, 
which requires substantial investment. Given that it requires less set-up infrastructure, 
drone delivery with reverse logistics capabilities can be more easily added to an existing 
supply chain, as just another transport modality.
Delivery (one-way or reverse logistics)
Pick-up (reverse logistics only)
1.	 Medical Samples (laboratory specimens) for 
HIV, TB and other Tests
2.	 Medical Wastage
3.	 Reports and other documentation
1.	 Medicines
2.	 Vaccines
3.	 Micronutrients
4.	 Lab Results
5.	 Medical tools, 
devices and  
equipment
6.	 Blood for  
transfusion
7.	 Larger payloads of 
humanitarian aid or 
health supplies
District hospital, 
subnational medical 
warehouse, or 
another inventory-
holding facility
Two modes of drone delivery
Lab Sample
processing facility
Secondary/Tertiary 
health facility or 
outreach facility

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
11
4. Drone delivery as a service
There are two predominant Drone-Delivery-as-a-Service (DDaaS) models that are offered 
by private companies and service providers – the third party logistics (3PL) model and the 
carrier model. The major difference between the two is that in the 3PL model, a service 
provider manages multiple functions, such as procurement, warehousing, order manage­
ment and transportation, and uses drones as a means of transport to complement the 
transport fleet. In the carrier model, a service provider is responsible for only one function: 
transportation. This model offers drone delivery between a hub and an end destination. 
The two models are presented in detail in the table below.
Some logistics companies have begun offering a hybrid model that combines 3PL and 
carrier, in which some commodities are delivered from a company-managed warehouse, 
while others are picked up from vendors (medical store, lab, hospital) and delivered straight 
to an end recipient.
3PL drone
delivery model
Carrier drone
delivery model
How does 
it work? 
3PL service providers offer integrated sup­
ply-chain services that include order manage­
ment, inventory storage and management, 
picking and packing, contract management, 
IT solutions, human resources, and shipping 
and distribution, which are implemented 
by a drone fleet. The entire logistics function 
can be outsourced to a 3PL provider.
In the carrier model, only the transpor­
tation component of the supply chain is 
handled, dealing with the point-to-point 
delivery of commodities. Companies 
that provide such services often lease or 
charter their own transportation fleet – in 
this case, drones – as well as provide all 
related operational components, such as 
human resources, repairs, maintenance, 
liability coverage, or regulatory certifica­
tions. 
Where it is 
currently
in use?
Ghana,Rwanda 
Malawi,
Democratic Republic of Congo
Advantages 
	
» Not limited to a transportation function, 
it can increase efficiency across multiple 
different supply-chain elements.
	
» More centralized approach, enabling private 
sector outsourcing, increasing efficiency 
and professionalization 
	
» Flexible and adaptive integration into 
the existing supply chain, without a 
demand for extensive infrastructure 
	
» Less capital intensive and does not 
require high set-up costs 
Disadvantages 
	
» Establishment of a parallel distribution 
function might add additional complexities 
to already challenged supply chains 
	
» The majority of 3PL providers that offer 
drone delivery use only a single mode of 
transport within their service package and 
there is a lack of integration with other 
transport
modalities  
	
» Focused only on transportation 
	
» Relies on the existing system and 
infrastructure, which might be poor 
and insufficient 

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
12
4. Drone delivery as a service
The selection of a drone delivery modality (forward versus reverse logistics) and drone 
delivery business model (3PL or carrier) will depend on actual demands and needs of the 
health supply chain in country. Therefore, it is essential to do a thorough assessment and 
needs analysis and collect baseline data that enable the choice of the most cost-effective 
and impactful approach. 
© UN013394 Khonje

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
13
5. Procurement of drone
delivery and Logistics services
5. Procurement of drone
delivery and logistics services
The below table outlines the key considerations, advantages and disadvantages of procur­
ing drones as an asset (fleet), versus outsourcing the drone delivery service to a logistics 
partner. The below considerations are applicable for both 3PL and carrier service models, 
while 3PL may incur higher set-up costs. 
UNICEF uses a few different transport management and contracting approaches, which 
are also applicable for drone delivery services:
	
» 3PL service providers (in the case of drones: 3PL or carriers) can be contracted by a 
Country Office to provide logistics and transportation services.
	
» A host government’s transport assets can be used by a Country Office, where available 
and feasible.
Resource elements 
Insourcing 
Outsourcing 
Upfront investment 
Medium to high 
Low to medium* 
Procurement of equipment 
Needed 
Not needed 
Internal capacity for drone
piloting and operations  
Needed 
Not needed 
Internal capacity to manage 
regulatory compliance 
Needed 
Not needed 
Internal capacity to maintain 
and repair drones 
Needed 
Not needed 
Internal capacity to manage 
liability and insurance aspects 
Needed 
Not needed
Dedicated personnel to run the 
operations 
Needed 
Not needed 
Dedicated project management 
staff 
Needed 
Needed 
Individual insurance 
Needed 
Not needed 
Risk of loss or appropriation of 
equipment  
Likely 
Unlikely 
Savings/cost-efficiency 
Long-term 
Short/medium-term 

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
14
5. Procurement of drone
delivery and Logistics services
» A Country Office may arrange in-country transport through another UN organization or
non-governmental organization (NGO) where this is cost-effective and includes all
required security measures.
Procuring and operating organization’s own transport assets (e.g., a fleet of delivery drones) 
will result in asset depreciation, infrastructure investments, maintenance and repairs, local 
capacity, liability and insurance costs. Outsourcing drone delivery is the most viable way 
of integrating drones into health supply chains.
It is advisable to make the use of a Request for Proposal of Services (RFPS) rather than 
an Invitation to Bid for Services (ITBS) procurement modality, to capture the complexity 
of drone delivery services.
When sourcing and contracting drone logistics service providers, partners can use the 
following tools and resources:

 
There are several international drone service providers that offer 3PL, carrier and hybrid 
drone delivery services. The majority of these companies are originally drone manufacturers 
and only a limited number of them have actual 3PL and in-country logistics experience.
A market assessment, a survey of existing in-country logistics service providers, an industry 
consultation, a Request for Expressions of Interest, or a Request for Information can be 
considered as methods to identify whether drone delivery is a part of the existing service 
offerings directly or possible via subcontractual service offerings. This can help identify 
available or potential local solutions for fulfilling identified needs in drone delivery and can 
help inform the needs of market shaping and private sector engagement

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
15
6. Additional Resources
6. Additional resources
For more information, please reach out to the Supply Division’s Supply Chain Strengthening 
Centre, at sc.strengthening@unicef.org and please visit https://www.unicef.org/supply/
leveraging-power-drones-reach-last-mile 
ANNEX 1: Drone delivery decision and solution tree, and implementation and 
planning checklist
ANNEX 2: Sample Terms of Reference for the Request for Proposals for in-country 
drone delivery services

--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
16
6. Additional Resources 
UNICEF Supply Division
Supply Chain Strengthening Centre
Marmorvej 51
2100 Copenhagen
Denmark
Telephone: +(45) 45 33 55 00
Email: sc.strengthening@unicef.org
www.unicef.org

www.unicef.org/supply/strengthening-
national-supply-chains
