--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Soft Computing
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/asoc
A multi-objective centralised agent-based optimisation approach for
vehicle routing problem with unique vehicles
Anees Abu-Monshar a,∗, Ammar Al-Bazi b
a Institute for Future Transport and Cities, Coventry University, Coventry, UK
b Institute for Advanced Manufacturing and Engineering, Coventry University, Coventry, UK
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 2 November 2021
Received in revised form 22 April 2022
Accepted 13 June 2022
Available online 18 June 2022
Keywords:
Vehicle routing problem
Unique vehicles
Agent-based modelling
Centralised agent cooperation
Metaheuristics
Multi-objective optimisation
a b s t r a c t
Motivated by heterogeneous service suppliers in crowd shipping routing problems, vehicles’ similarity
assumption is questioned in the well-known logistical Vehicle Routing Problems (VRP) by considering
different start/end locations, capacities, as well as shifts in the Time Window variant (VRPTW). In
order to tackle this problem, a new agent-based metaheuristic architecture is proposed to capture the
uniqueness of vehicles by modelling them as agents while governing the search with centralised agent
cooperation. This cooperation aims to generate near optimum routes by minimising the number of
vehicles used, total travelled distance, and total waiting times. The innovative architecture encapsulates
three individual core modules in a flexible metaheuristic implementation. First, the problem is
modelled by an agent-based module that includes its components in representing, evaluating, and
altering solutions. A second metaheuristic module is then designed and integrated, followed by a
multi-objective module introduced to sort solutions generated by the metaheuristic module based
on Pareto dominance. Tests on benchmark instances were run, resulting in better waiting times, with
an average reduction of 2.21-time units, at the expense of the other objectives. Benchmark instances
are modified to tackle the unique vehicle’s problem by randomising locations, capacities, and operating
shifts and tested to justify the proposed model’s applicability.
© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1. Introduction
Since their introduction by Dantzig and Ramser [1], Vehicle
Routing Problems (VRPs) have been evolving into various variants
motivated by cases from real-life applications, which resulted
in incorporating additional problem attributes such as Multiple
Depot (MDVRP), customer Time Window (VRPTW), Dynamic cus-
tomer demand arrival (DVRP) and other variants [2]. However,
the complexity of the problem increases with such additional
real-life constraints. As a result, it becomes challenging to find
an optimal solution since the fundamental VRP is considered
NP-hard [3]. Consequently, solution approaches to these variants
became pragmatic, aiming at finding near-optimal solutions in
an efficient computational time, and the most commonly used
methods are (meta)heuristics [4].
With the trend of crowd shipping, where the supply of ship-
ping services is offered by a large mass of heterogeneous actors,
matching supply with demand becomes a challenge that also
requires optimum routing of the problem [5]. Therefore, this
paper takes into consideration the heterogeneity in the supply of
∗Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses:
monshara@coventry.ac.uk (A. Abu-Monshar),
aa8535@coventry.ac.uk (A. Al-Bazi).
shipping services in a routing problem by challenging the vehicles
similarity assumptions in VRPs, not only in the capacity as seen
in variants of heterogeneous VRPs but also the start and ending
routes’ locations as well as different operating shifts. However,
such a problem with unique vehicle attributes was not previously
investigated. Schopka and Kopfer [6] considered vehicles can start
from anywhere but end at one depot, while Goel and Gruhn [7]
and Goel [8] considered unique vehicle locations, starting and
ending; however, the other attributes are not considered. As a
result, a unique way of modelling is required to capture the
uniqueness of the vehicles’ attributes.
Therefore, this paper aims to propose an innovative agent-
based optimisation model to capture the uniqueness of vehicles
in this routing problem, along with the customer Time Windows
(VRPTW) variant.
The main contribution of this study can be summarised as
follows:
• To propose a new agent-based representation of this unique
routing problem that adopts the centralised agent coopera-
tion approach.
• To introduce a new customisable metaheuristic framework
integrated with the proposed agent-based model, including
multi-objective components.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2022.109187
1568-4946/© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
• To provide a generalised way of evaluating and altering
VRPTW solutions to make it applicable to apply any appro-
priate metaheuristic framework.
This innovative agent-based optimisation model will support
logistics planners in managing their collection or delivery opera-
tions for better cost-effective and resource-utilised solutions.
This paper is structured as follows: recent related work is pre-
sented in Section 2. In Section 3, the centralised agent-based op-
timisation approach is explained along with the proposed model
with its problem, metaheuristics, and multiple objectives compo-
nents. Experimental results on benchmark instances and modified
instances are shown in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the
paper and suggests directions for future research.
2. Related work
This work focuses on modelling and solving VRPTW with
the consideration of the uniqueness of every vehicle. The Multi-
ple Depot VRPTW (MDVRPTW) and Open VRPTW (OVRPTW) are
closely related to this problem in terms of locations, while other
related studies may include different capacities. MDVRPTW, first
tackled by Cordeau et al. [9], does allow a group of homogeneous
vehicles to be grouped having the same start and end location,
while OVRPTW, introduced by Repoussis et al. [10], relaxes the
end of routes constraints which do not require the vehicle to
return to depot and routes, therefore, remain open. The following
Sections, 2.1 and 2.2, review the recent literature on these two
variants. A thorough review of these two types of variants is con-
ducted in this section. This review provides a clear understanding
of these variants, including their settings, objectives, constraints
and methodologies.
2.1. Previous work on MDVRPTW
The MDVRPTW problem has been investigated by many re-
searchers, including but not limited to Chiu et al. [11], who
adopted a two-phase (route construction and improvement)
heuristic approach to minimise vehicle waiting times leading
to reduce total vehicles used. Ting and Chen [12] tackled the
MDVRPTW problem by proposing a Multiple Ant Colony System
(MACS) to construct routes. The routes construction starts by
firstly allocating orders to depots and then routing within depots,
while routes improvements are implemented within each ant
using Simulated Annealing (SA). Weise et al. [13] developed
a multi-objective evolutionary algorithm to minimise missed
customers and total distance while maximising vehicle utilisa-
tion. Bettinelli et al. [14] adopted an exact approach for a mixed
fleet problem where any vehicle can associate with any depot and
proposed a branch-and-cut-and price algorithm to minimise the
costs endured by vehicles’ fixed costs and distances. Luo and Chen
[15] proposed a multi-stage Shuffled Frog Leaping Algorithm
(SFLA) to the problem that firstly clusters customers to depots
as centroids, then performs an enhanced neighbourhood local
search within/across every cluster and finally selects the elitist
individual for another new clustering round unless termination
conditions are met. Dayarian et al. [16] proposed a branch-
and-price algorithm to solve heterogeneous vehicle problems to
minimise fixed and variable routes’ costs. Cantu-Funes et al. [17]
formulated a mathematical model for multi-depot and periodic
variants, where customers can be served and adopted a two-
phase heuristic approach to construct and improve routes using
local search.
Contrary to the previous MDVRPTW studies, the following
softened the customer time window constraint. Maischberger and
Cordeau [18] performed a parallel implementation of Cordeau
et al. [9] using Tabu Search (TS) and achieved slightly improved
results in the total distances. Xu and Jiang [19] proposed a Vari-
able Neighbourhood Search (VNS) for a case with heterogeneous
vehicles under relaxed time window and vehicle’s working time
constraints to minimise travel costs. The same authors extended
their study by adopting diversification strategies in accepting
solutions per iteration using SA. Wang et al. [20] proposed a
multi-objective evolutionary algorithm for a case with soft time
windows to minimise travel time, distances, waiting time, and
time window violations. Sadati et al. [21] tackled the MDVRPTW
problem with relaxed constraints and proposed a Variable Tabu
Neighbourhood Search (VTNS) with granular local search and
tabu shaking for its intensification and diversification mecha-
nisms, respectively. Firstly, an initial solution is provided by as-
signing customers to the nearest depot, and then a modified
saving heuristic is used to construct routes.
Further studies have incorporated additional problem con-
straints. Dharmapriya et al. [22] considered a Split Delivery (MD-
VRPTWSD) problem with additional objectives from a previous
study [13] that balanced workload across all vehicles and solved it
using a single solution metaheuristic, TS and SA. Adelzadeh et al.
[23] proposed an SA algorithm for a problem with fuzzy customer
time windows and heterogeneous vehicles that differ in travel
times, capacity, and cost. Cornillier et al. [24] considered a routing
problem of Multiple products for Petrol Station Replenishment
(MPSRPTW), where vehicles are heterogeneous. Heuristic opti-
misation was used to reduce large numbers of feasible trips if
obtained. A mathematical model was formulated to select the
required trips if the objective is to maximise the revenues. Afshar-
Nadjafi and Afshar-Nadjafi [25,26] adopted the SA approach for
a problem with time-dependent travel times determined based
on the departure time from the depot and a limited number
of heterogeneous fleets at every depot to minimise fixed and
variable travel costs. Li et al. [27] adopted a hybrid evolutionary
and local search approach for a variant where vehicles could
end their routes at any depot to minimise travel costs. Zhen
et al. [28] formulated a mathematical model for a variant with
possible multiple trips per vehicle solved with a hybrid swarm
and evolutionary algorithm to minimise the total time. Zarandi
et al. [29] considered a Multiple Depot Location Routing Problem
(MDLRPTW) with fuzzy travel times, where each depot location
has to be determined along with its routes, by proposing an SA
algorithm to optimise the travelled distances.
Pickup and delivery cases were also considered within multi-
depot problems. Flisberg et al. [30] proposed a concept of flow
demand nodes (locations) to represent the Pickup and Delivery
(PDVRP) variant with multiple depots extending a TS developed
by Cordeau et al. [9] with a relaxation of serving all customers’
constraints. Sombuntham et al. [31] proposed Particle Swarm
Optimisation (PSO) algorithm for a case with both pickup and de-
livery, where customers may require either collection or delivery
services. The aim was to optimise the number of vehicles and the
total distance.
More generalised and rich formulations can be seen in Goel
and Gruhn [7]. They introduced the General VRP (GVRP), where
real-life constraints are combined into one problem, including
heterogeneous fleets with different locations (start/end), travel
times and operating times, order-vehicle compatibility, and ca-
pacity dimensions constraints. A local search with an adaptive
neighbourhood structure maximised the total profit. A later study
proposed column generation heuristic was used to solve the
same GVRP settings [8]. Kramer et al. [32] studied a highly con-
strained variant, dubbed rich VRP, where they considered a het-
erogeneous fleet, periodic demand, soft time windows, customer-
vehicle compatibility as maximum duration, and customer con-
straints for each vehicle solved using an Iterated Local Search
(ILS) heuristic in order to minimise travel distance and operat-
ing costs. Alcaraz et al. [33] also considered a similar rich VRP
2

--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
with an additional constraint of required route breaks for drivers
while considering the possibility of outsourcing last-mile demand
solved using a proposed heuristic algorithm to minimise the
outsourcing costs and travelled distance.
2.2. Previous work on OVRPTW
The OVRPTW problem was previously investigated, including
the targets, faced constraints, and the used methodology. The
problem has seen variations in how the customer time window
constraint was modelled. Norouzi et al. [34] proposed a multi-
objective PSO algorithm for an Open VRP that considers serving
customers as earlier as possible in their time window, given that
the sooner customers are served, the more the sales volume,
aiming to maximise the sales while minimising the total distance
and achieving vehicles load balance. Brito et al. [35] adopted
the Ant Colony Optimisation (ACO) approach for both Closed
and Open VRP (COVRPTW), where some vehicles may require
to return to a depot with fuzzy customers’ time windows and
vehicles capacities in order to minimise the total distance. Xia
and Fu [36] proposed a TS algorithm for a Soft Time Window
and customer Satisfaction Rate variant (OVRPSTWSR), where cus-
tomer satisfaction is measured based on the degree of its soft time
window violation. The aim was to minimise the used vehicles,
distance, and time window penalties.
Further studies have incorporated additional problem con-
straints. Brandão [37] proposed an ILS algorithm for a variant
where drivers’ shift constrains routes’ durations to minimise the
number of used vehicles. Hashemi et al. [38] formulated a math-
ematical model solved using a heuristic algorithm for a multi-trip
variant of a real-life case of an OVRPTW. Yu et al. [39] considered
an OVRPTW with a two-dimensional capacity loading problem.
The original routing problem is solved using a population-based
metaheuristic, dubbed Learning Whale Optimisation Algorithm
(LWOA), while the best individual in a generation undergoes
further loading decisions using a proposed filling algorithm.
Other major modifications to OVRPTW can be seen in Schopka
and
Kopfer
[6].
They
introduced
the
Reverse
Open
VRP
(ROVRPTW), where vehicles can start at any location and end at
a central depot. An Adaptive Large Neighbourhood Search (ALNS)
was proposed for a Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) formula-
tion of the problem to optimise vehicle costs and travel times. Niu
et al. [40] proposed a TS algorithm for a Green Open variant (GOV-
RPTW) to minimise emission costs and drivers’ wages based on
the vehicles used and distance travelled. Shen et al. [41] proposed
both PSO and TS algorithms for routes construction and improve-
ment, respectively, for a multiple depot variant (MDOVRPTW)
to minimise drivers’ costs, time window violations, fuel, and
emission. Babagolzadeh et al. [42] formulated a MIP model for
a variant called Two-Echelon Open (2E-OVRPTW), where stocks
are transported to intermediate depots before final customer
delivery can be released at a specific release time. The aim was to
minimise emission costs, time window violations, and total dis-
tance. Rahmani [43] combined variants of a Close–Open VRPTW
(COVRPTW) and Multiple Cross-Docking (MCVRPTW). The latter
is concerned about vehicle compatibility at (un)loading at specific
docks that occurs multiple times during the supply chain. Consid-
ering additional delivery and installation times uncertainty, they
formulated a mathematical model that was solved using a robust
hybrid metaheuristic of Firefly Algorithm (FA) improved using
genetic operators to minimise the total costs.
Based on the above review, some studied variants are highly
similar to the problem being investigated in this paper in terms of
the vehicles’ start/end locations. However, each vehicle’s unique-
ness, including its different operating shifts, was not previously
investigated. For instance, Schopka and Kopfer [6] considered ev-
ery vehicle to start at a unique location, but the end of the routes
is the same at a single depot, while Shen et al. [41] considered a
multi depot case where the vehicles in a depot are still sharing the
same starting location. Goel and Gruhn [7] and Goel [8] captured
only the uniqueness in these locations, while in our previous
study [44], we considered both unique locations and capacities.
However, this paper further extends our previous study and in-
vestigates the uniqueness of the vehicles’ capacities and locations
as well as assigning different shifts to vehicles, a problem that
has not been tackled before. This investigation includes modelling
each vehicle as an agent to capture individualised attributes of the
agents for a more generalised heterogeneous variant.
3. The proposed centralised agent-based metaheuristic opti-
misation architecture
The concept of applying agent-based modelling in optimisa-
tion has been addressed in earlier studies. Barbati et al. [45]
discussed the fundamentals of designing agents for optimisa-
tion problems in scheduling and routing. They differentiated
between two different types of agent-based optimisation ap-
proaches: competitive, where agents greedily seek to benefit
their objective, and cooperative, where the agents collaborate
in optimising their collective (global) objectives. Cooperative ap-
proaches can be classified into distributed, where decentralised
agents measure objects from their local perspective and act upon
them, and centralised, where a super/governing agent performs
global measures of objectives and directs the sub-agents to act to
improve such globally measured objectives. Monostori et al. [46]
further questioned the degrees in the cooperative approaches by
further classifying a hybrid approach that divides the optimisa-
tion tasks and responsibilities between either being distributed
or centralised.
Adopting the agent-based optimisation approach in VRP is not
new. Mes et al. [47] considered a Dial-A-Ride Problem (DARP)
solved using an auction algorithm to coordinate customer vehicle
communications using a competitive agent-based approach. Bar-
bucha [48] provided a centralised approach embedded with a
Guided Local Search (GLS), and in a later study [49] used GLS
to DVRP problem, and in [50], a population-based evolutionary
algorithm was also used for the same problem. Vokřínek et al.
[51] considered certain agent sorting rules and strategies aimed
to minimise vehicles. Such rules are further extended by adapting
Solomon’s insertion [52] to incorporate time windows [53]. Mar-
tin et al. [54] adopted the agent-based approach to enhance the
metaheuristic search procedure for large solution spaces that
runs different metaheuristics agents in parallel and exchange the
best-found moves.
Davidsson et al. [55] highlighted the benefits of adopting the
decentralised approach in optimisation compared to the classi-
cal optimisation techniques for large-sized problems in reducing
solution time and computational complexity. However, such a
decentralised or hybrid way of optimisation does not guarantee
optimality or perform the necessary, feasible regions searches.
Therefore, we based our methodology on the centralised co-
operative approach, contrary to our previous study that adopted
the hybrid cooperative approach [44]. This centralised approach
applies a proposed metaheuristic framework compatible with the
routing problem under study. This problem is generally modelled
and evaluated using the agent-based approach.
The proposed methodology overcomes the localised greedy
solutions generated by using the decentralised and hybrid agent-
based approaches by centralising the solution search with the
help of a metaheuristic algorithm. Such a shift to centralised
search is similar to how heuristics evolved to metaheuristics
due to their inflexibility in tackling combinatorial optimisation
problems such as VRP [56]. However, the main challenge is how
3

--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
Fig. 1. The proposed agent-based metaheuristic architecture.
to apply a metaheuristic algorithmic framework to the prob-
lem under study, given the vehicles’ heterogeneity. The issue
can be addressed by designing proper solutions Representation,
Evaluation and Variation of the problem before applying any
metaheuristic framework components.
This study’s scope lies in the modelling and optimisation of
a VRP, which has a set of inputs for the model to be initiated
and generate optimal outputs (routes). The input data is the
information about all the customers and vehicles where they
can be initialised as agents. This data will then set the initial
attributes for these agents. As a result, customer agents will have
these attributes: location, demanded quantity, time window, and
service time. In contrast, a vehicle agent has the capacity, current
location, home location, shift, and maximum duration attributes.
On the other hand, the desired model outputs should be vehi-
cle routes measured against specific objectives: number of vehi-
cles used, total travelled distance, total travel time, total waiting
time and any constraints violations found at the end of the search.
The relaxed constraints are the late time window for each cus-
tomer and duration and capacity limits for every vehicle. These
inputs and outputs are presented in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1 also shows process core modules that help the search for
optimal routes. The first is the agent-based model of the problem
consisting of the assignment, customer, and vehicle agents, which
represent the solutions. It performs centralised evolutions and
variations, the second being the metaheuristic framework that
performs a more centralised and global search, and finally, a
multi-objective module that aids in sorting the found solutions
considering the multiple objectives of the problem.
In metaheuristic design and implementation, it is vital to dis-
tinguish between problem-dependent and metaheuristic-specific
components to flexibly apply the required metaheuristic com-
ponents or other frameworks to the problem if necessary Talbi
[57]. The problem components consist of the solution represen-
tation design, evaluation, and variation, while the metaheuris-
tic components include solution selection criteria, replacement,
and algorithm stopping conditions. Furthermore, Talbi [57] also
considered the possibility of additional multi-objective compo-
nents made compatible with such implementation with a specific
fitness assignment and solutions preservation techniques.
Fig. 2 illustrates how the architecture core modules communi-
cate. The model starts in the agent-based problem model, where
the Representation, Evaluation, and Variation of solutions occur
and are sent to the adopted metaheuristic framework to perform
the required global search. Selected solutions are then sent to
the multi-objective module to be ranked using a proper sorting
technique then the ranked solutions are returned accordingly. The
metaheuristic module then decides to request more variation of
solutions from the problem module or returns the most optimal
solution found.
The architecture’s core modules, including the agent-based,
metaheuristic and multi-objective components, will be further
discussed in the following sections. The detailed design of
problem-dependent components is explained in 3.1. The meta-
heuristic used along with its components is explained in 3.2. Fur-
thermore, the multi-objective components in metaheuristic im-
plementation and its detailed implementation are shown in 3.3.
3.1. The agent-based VRP module
The proposed agent-based module for the VRP comprises three
types of agents: customer, vehicle, and assignment agents. The
customer agent stores its constraints, for example, time window
and demand, and provides them when requested. In addition to
its constraints, such as capacity and location, the vehicle agent
has specific tasks in optimisation by performing feasibility evalu-
ations of its proposed routes, which are sequences of customer
agents. On the other hand, the assignment agent is a dummy
agent to govern global and centralised interactions between the
agents for the optimisation process to diverge away from the
local optima with a metaheuristic framework. This module com-
ponent’s main centralised evaluation process is explained later
in 3.1.2, where messages are exchanged between the agents
and the necessary local evaluations are performed. Fig. 3 illus-
trates the proposed module. This proposed module can provide
the necessary metaheuristic problem-dependent representation,
evaluation, and variation components.
3.1.1. Representation
In early VRP formulations, Dantzig and Ramser [1] represented
the problem as Integer Linear Programme, where the decision
variable is the connection between two nodes, also known as
the ‘‘edge representation’’. Later, when the heuristics approach
of both sweep [58] and the two-phase [59] heuristics were in-
troduced to solve this NP-Hard problem, the representation has
changed to an ordered sequence of customer nodes known as
the ‘‘path representation’’ which has been widely used in meta-
heuristics [60] hence, it was adopted. A solution representation
must represent every possible solution and be efficient when
altered where a search path must exist between any solution [57].
Therefore, any customers’ permutation is considered a solution,
as infeasible constraints can be relaxed regardless of its feasibility
Since the agent-based model consists of vehicles, sequences of
customers (can be provided to each vehicle agent), and each ve-
hicle has its start and end node; hence a solution representation
of such unique nodes is emitted. This will be known strictly and
implicitly from the vehicle agent attributes of current/home lo-
cations to be considered when evaluating solutions. The resulted
agent-based VRP solution set is shown in Fig. 4, where instances
of vehicle agents (V1, V2, ..., Vn) are provided with sequences of
customers. All customers must be sequenced and the occurrence
of a customer across all vehicles is only once.
3.1.2. Evaluation
Since the VRP is a general from the Travelling Salesman Prob-
lem (TSP), its original goal is to minimise total travelled dis-
tance [61]. However, additional objectives have been consid-
ered, such as minimising used vehicles [62] and total waiting
time [11]. As a result, multiple objectives approaches have been
considered [63]. Furthermore, additional constraints have been
incorporated, such as the capacity, route duration, and customer
time window constraints, requiring additional feasibility evalua-
tion for these constraints. However, this has resulted in a highly
4

--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
Fig. 2. The core modules workflow.
Fig. 3. Proposed agent-based VRP module.
Fig. 4. Solution representation.
constrained problem, and certain constraints have been relaxed
to allow the search to explore infeasible regions temporarily [9].
The evaluation process in the proposed agent-based model
occurs mainly at the vehicle agent level, where a potential route
is provided, and vehicle constraints are checked. Each node in-
formation is requested from the respective customer agents, in-
cluding the time window, demand, service time and location.
Accordingly, local route measures such as distance, waiting time,
and constraint violations are determined. In contrast, global mea-
sures such as the total of these measures and the number of
utilised vehicles are determined globally at the assignment agent
level from evaluations returned from all vehicle agents for a par-
ticular solution. Fig. 5 illustrates the centralised agent messaging
for solution evaluation.
In Fig. 5, the evaluation process starts when the assignment
agent provides every vehicle agent with its route, part of a so-
lution. Then, the vehicle agent requests the constraints of every
customer agent in the route sequence. The required feasibility
evaluation will then be performed to be returned to the assign-
ment agent, for which it collects all measures from all the routes
of the potential solution and performs a centralised evaluation.
The considered objectives in this evaluation are the total dis-
tance, total waiting time, and the number of vehicles used, where
all to be minimised, and the respective mathematical representa-
tions are:
min
Vr
∑
vr=1
Dvr
(1)
min
Vr
∑
vr=1
Wvr
(2)
min
Vr
∑
v=1
yvr
(3)
where Vr is a set of different routes provided to each vehicle for
a particular solution, while the subscript vr indicates a selected
route r provided to vehicle v from the set Vr. Dvr and Wvr are
the total distance and waiting time for every route r provided
to the vehicle v while yvr indicate whether vehicle v is idle (0) or
utilised (1) if route r is provided. Calculating distance and waiting
time measures of a vehicle route is done at the level of the vehicle
agent, taking into account the different starting and ending nodes
of the route that are unique to the vehicle. The summation of
the distances and waiting times are calculated at the assignment
agent level. On the other hand, calculating the number of vehicles
used can be implicitly determined from the route provided to the
vehicle; if empty, then the vehicle is not utilised; otherwise, it
is. Distance and waiting time measures are considered zero if an
empty route is provided to a vehicle.
One of two strategies can be adopted regarding constraint
handling: the Reject or Penalised Strategy. The penalised strategy
has been adopted since Cordeau et al. [9] as they solved the
MDVRPTW by relaxing the time window, duration, and capacity
constraints. However, it allows for the exploration of infeasi-
ble solutions, with respect to the relaxed constraints, with a
penalty. Gendreau et al. [64] proposed an adaptive penalty strat-
egy to avoid specifying penalties as parameters. Penalties would
be initiated randomly and then adapted based on the best previ-
ous h iterative solutions evaluated for each constraint violation. If
all the previous h solutions violate a constraint, the corresponding
penalty for this violation is multiplied by a factor γ ; otherwise,
divided by it. However, if they were mixed, the penalty value
remains. Rochat and Semet [65] randomised the factor γ between
1.5 and 2. Since the relaxed constraints are each vehicle’s capacity
and duration as well as every customer’s late time window, the
equations for each violation per potential vehicle route are as
follows:
VQvr = max(0, Qvr −Qv)
(4)
Vdurvr = max(0, durvr −durv)
(5)
VTWvr =
∑
i∈vr
(max(0, bi −li))
(6)
where VQvr , Vdurvr and VTWvr are violations for capacity, duration
and time window constraints, respectively, for a route r provided
to vehicle v. Qvr is the occupied capacity, and durvr is the resulted
duration, each for route vr. The subscript i indicates a customer
5

--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
Fig. 5. Centralised evaluation.
in the route vr where bi and li are its arrival time and late time
window.
Since this work takes into consideration vehicle shifts, it is
incorporated in the time window violation equation by evaluat-
ing a route provided to a vehicle by adding two extra dummy
customer nodes at first and the end of the route, indicating their
start and end locations, each with a time window of the vehicle
shift allowing for shift feasibility evaluation.
Since these measures are localised at the vehicle agent mea-
sure, the total violations for each constraint are then calculated
by the assignment agent for a particular solution of routes Vr as
per the following equations:
VQVr =
∑
vr∈Vr
VQvr
(7)
VdurVr =
∑
vr∈Vr
Vdurvr
(8)
VTWVr =
∑
vr∈Vr
VTWvr
(9)
where VQVr , VdurVr and VTWVr are total violations for each capac-
ity, duration, and time windows for a particular solution set Vr.
In order to fully apply the penalised strategy, penalties should be
multiplied for every total violation to influence the algorithmic
evaluation of a particular solution Vr. The following equation
represents the total penalised violations for a solution Vr:
PVr = PQ VQVr + Pdur VdurVr + PTW VTWvr
(10)
where PQ , Pdur and PTW are non-negative parameters representing
penalties for each capacity, route duration, and time window
constraints, respectively. PVr is the resulted penalty value of the
solution Vr. Each penalty is iteratively updated every h iteration
and either increased or decreased by multiplying or dividing by
a factor γ .
3.1.3. Variation
Variation of VRP solutions in metaheuristics depends if the
framework is a single solution-based or population-based meta-
heuristic. Single solution variations are mainly local heuristics
that can be adapted to generate neighbourhoods in high-level
heuristics such as TS by modifying one solution with a spe-
cific move to generate alternative solutions. These single so-
lution variations can also be classified into two moves [66]:
intra-route, variation within one route, and inter-route, variation
across multiple routes. This paper adopts the intra-route move
of Or-opt [67], where a specific nodes’ order is flipped within a
route and the inter-route move of CROSS-exchange [68], where
specific customer sequences are exchanged between two routes.
On the other hand, population-based variations of the problem
are mainly seen in crossover operators in evolutionary algo-
rithms, such as the Genetic Algorithm (GA), where two selected
solutions exchange parts of their sequences to generate new
offspring, either one or two. However, such a procedure may
result in missing or duplicate nodes if the path representation is
used. As a result, unique crossover operators have been developed
for routing problems such as Partially-Mapped (PMX), Order (OX)
and Cycle (CX) crossovers [60]. However, with the introduction of
customer time window constraints into VRP, the crossover oper-
ators have been adapted to check further solution feasibility and
constraint satisfaction. Sequence-Based (SBX) and Route-Based
(RBX) have been proposed by Potvin and Bengio [69], where
solution repairs are done to ensure feasibility after applying the
operator. In later work, Ombuki et al. [70] proposed a crossover
operator dubbed Route Cross (RC). In this crossover, randomly
selected routes from a parent are removed and the unrouted
customers are sorted based on the occurrence in the other parent
then iteratively re-inserted in the least cost position. If no feasible
position exists, the customers’ coverage is relaxed, which allows
for missing customers during the search with a penalty. Ombuki
et al. [63] further improved RC to Best Cost RC (BCRC), that later
adopted by Ghoseiri and Ghannadpour [62] to use for solving
multiple objectives problems. The aim is to minimise the vehicles
used and total distance, where they limit the randomly selected
routes to one in both parents and customer re-insertions are
done in random order while not allowing customers to be missed
during the search by initiating new routes.
However, this paper adopts the latest developed VRPTW
crossover operator BCRC with minor adaptations. The cost cal-
culation for re-insertions considers the penalties of the relaxed
constraints, and route initiation is different as every vehicle agent
has to be checked due to their heterogeneity, increasing the
computational cost.
3.2. The metaheuristic module
This module follows the identification of the problem re-
quirements discussed in Section 3.1. This structure enables an
appropriate selection of the metaheuristic components (selection,
recombination and stopping condition) for the best problem-
solving practice. Metaheuristics are algorithmic frameworks, or
‘‘recipes’’, that provide high-level solution strategies regardless of
the problem being solved [71]. Such recipes are mostly favoured
when solving VRPs [72], with GA and TS being the most adopted
frameworks [73]. Despite that, the choice of using these recipes
is up to the researcher(s), the problem on hand dictates a frame-
work to be a population-based metaheuristic to tackle it multi-
objectively [74]. Therefore, this work adopts a population-based
evolutionary metaheuristic, GA, to solve the problem under study.
6

--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
Fig. 6. Population-based solution representation.
GA, first introduced by Holland [75], is a stochastic process that
examines pools of solutions (population) by randomly altering
selected individuals, skewed to better ones, using crossover and
mutation operators to replace the current pool for another ex-
ploratory evolution round.
3.2.1. Agent-based adaptation to population representation
Provided that the adopted metaheuristic is a population-based
framework, the representation provided in Fig. 4 is not suffi-
cient, given that it only represents one solution. Therefore, a
slight adaptation to each vehicle’s memory structure is needed
by initiating alternative routes, or chromosomes, with proper
indexing to create additional individuals. Each individual consists
of the same-indexed chromosomes from all vehicle agents, while
a population is a group of such individuals. The best-found indi-
vidual can be stored in fixed memory in the vehicle agent dubbed
route. Individuals are selected based on their unique index during
selection and recombination, then generate new individuals with
a new unique index after applying recombination operations. The
population-based representation is illustrated in Fig. 6.
3.2.2. The initialisation, selection, and recombination
To begin the search, GA needs to start with an initial popu-
lation, and in VRPTW problems, individuals can be created ran-
domly, using a heuristic or a mixture of both. There are two types
of route construction heuristics used to generate individuals:
greedy or Solomon I1 heuristics, as seen in [62,63], respectively.
However, designing such heuristics for constructing routes and
sequences of customer agents for each of the vehicle agents will
result in decentralised cooperation between the agents, contrary
to the scope of this paper, which aims at experimenting with a
fully centralised approach. Therefore, a fully randomised initial
population was implemented by randomising sequences of cus-
tomers, and the number of customers is equally distributed across
the vehicles for a particular individual solution. The adopted
selection method is the Roulette Wheel Selection. Individuals are
selected based on their probability determined by their assigned
fitness, more on fitness assignment in 3.3.1, resulting in favouring
of more fitted individuals.
Regarding recombination, the chosen operators are explained
in 3.1.3, BCRC for crossover and Or-opt, with three nodes limit,
as mutation. Furthermore, a greedy search heuristic is also imple-
mented to greedily improve specific individuals with a probability
of using the CROSS-exchange operator. A similar approach was
found in Ghoseiri and Ghannadpour’s work [62], where they
adopted a hill-climbing improvement for a certain number of
individuals and Vidal et al. [76] in their education operator.
3.2.3. The adopted genetic algorithm
The overall framework of the adopted GA is shown in Algo-
rithm 1. The evolutionary process starts by defining the maxi-
mum number of generations Gen, probabilities of crossover Xrate,
mutation Mrate and local search LSrate and population size PSize.
Before the evolutionary search, the initial population Pop is first
generated, and the population selection size Selsize and the num-
ber of crossovers Xcount are calculated based on the parameters
provided. At the start of every generation, a subsequent sub
population Popselected is selected of size Selsize and a subsequent sub
population of size two Parents using Roulette Wheel Selection,
and for several counts Xcount, crossovers are performed. Offspring
are added to the population Popselected. At the end of the crossover
operation, a new population Pop is set to Popselected. The mutation
and local search are applied to every individual with probabilities
of Mrate and LSrate, respectively. Towards the end of a specific gen-
eration g, fitness is calculated for every individual Ind and ranked
accordingly while the best individual is sought and checked with
the best found so far. This evolutionary process is repeated until
the maximum number of generations is reached.
3.3. The multi-objective module
After addressing the VRP requirements, multiple objectives
components
(fitness
assignment,
diversity
preservation
and
7

--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
Algorithm 1: Genetic Algorithm
Data: Gen, Xrate, Mrate, LSrate, PSize
Result: Best found Vr
Generate Pop randomly;
Selsize = max(int((1 - Xrate) x Psize), 2);
Xcount = PSize - Selsize;
g = 0;
while g < Gen do
g := g + 1;
Popselected = Roulette Wheel Selection(Pop, Selsize);
Parents = Roulette Wheel Selection(Popselected, 2);
for Xcount do
Apply Crossover on Parents and generate Offspring;
Add Offspring to Popselected;
end
Set Pop as Popselected;
for Ind in Pop do
Apply Mutation on Ind with a probability of Mrate;
Apply Local Search on Ind with a probability of LSrate;
end
Calculate fitnesses for every Ind in Pop;
Rank every Ind in Pop based on fitness function;
Determine the fittest Vr;
end
elitism) will be selected and integrated. These additional com-
ponents are suggested by Talbi [57] when aiming to address
a problem for multiple objectives using a metaheuristic. The
choice of these three components is discussed in the following
subsections.
3.3.1. Fitness assignment
Fitness assignment is when individuals are compared and
ranked, in a single value, for a vector of objective functions.
Despite being four types of fitness assignment [57], only two
have been implemented in VRP: the scalar and dominance-based
approaches. The scalar approach, traditionally adopted, adds up
all the objectives with defined weights to transform the prob-
lem into a single objective function. However, determining such
weights as parameters requires previous knowledge of the prob-
lem instance from the modeller or decision-maker. Therefore,
the dominance-based approach is adopted where the Pareto op-
timality is sought by sorting solutions based on their vector of
objectives. It is apparent in routing problems that the dominance-
based approach is preferred to be implemented with population-
based algorithms, evolutionary in particular, owing to their ability
to deal with a pool of solutions to find their Pareto optimality.
In contrast, the scalar approach is mainly used in single-
solution metaheuristics [74]. Therefore, in this paper, the dominance-
based Pareto ranking approach is adopted, similar to what has
been implemented in [62,63], with modification in evaluating the
objective vector to consider the relaxed constraints. The resulted
penalties from the violated constraints have to be taken into
consideration in each fitness assignment. Therefore, for every
objective function, the overall solution penalty, shown in Eq. (10),
is added to it, which makes the resulted vector of objective for a
particular solution individual Vr:
Overall Objective Vector = [PVr +
Vr
∑
vr=1
Dvr , PVr
+
Vr
∑
vr=1
Wvr , PVr +
Vr
∑
v=1
yvr ]
(11)
Based on the resulted objective vector, dominance sorting of
a particular population Pop in a generation can be implemented
as shown in Algorithm 2. It starts by initialising the first rank
Rankcurrent to be 1 and iterates through all the individuals of the
population and checks which of them are not dominated by any
other individual. Their rank is set to the current rank if they are
not dominated. Upon determining this rank of non-dominated
individuals, they are then removed from the unsorted population
Pop and added to the ranked population set Popranked. The current
rank Rankcurrent is then incremented by 1, and the process is
repeated to determine the next non-dominated rank set until no
further individuals are left in the unsorted population Pop.
Algorithm 2: Pareto Ranking
Data: Pop
Result: Popranked
Rankcurrent = 1;
while Pop̸ = φ do
for Ind in Pop do
if Ind is non-dominated in Pop then
Ind Rank = Rankcurrent;
end
end
for Ind in Pop do
if Ind Rank = Rankcurrent then
Remove Ind from Pop;
Add Ind to Popranked;
end
end
Rankcurrent:= Rankcurrent + 1;
end
Upon completing the Pareto dominance ranking, fitness cal-
culation for every individual is needed to be based on their rank.
Therefore, a complement of the normalised rank for every indi-
vidual in a population is calculated, based on Eq. (12), to favour
the low-ranked individuals; better solutions to this minimisation
problem in the selection process given that their fitness will be
their probability of selection.
Indfitness = 1 −(RankInd −Rankmin)
(Rankmax −Rankmin)
(12)
where Indfitness and RankInd are the calculated fitness and rank
given to the individual, respectively. While Rankmin and Rankmax
are the minimum and maximum ranks in a given population.
3.3.2. Elitism and diversity
Elitism preserves the best-found solutions across the genera-
tions to ensure the quality of the Pareto front at every genera-
tion and prevent the deteriorating performance of the algorithm.
At the same time, diversity preservation emphasises generating
diverse solution sets to prevent biases and stagnation of the
search [57].
This work uses an elitism strategy by passing a certain number
of good-fit individuals with no alterations to the next generation,
as evidenced in Algorithm 1, where only two individuals selected
from the population undergo crossover recombination. In con-
trast, the remaining are passed to the next generation. However,
for diversity preservation in the multi-objective VRPTW problem,
proper distance preservation in the objective space could not be
maintained due to the discrete nature of the number of vehicles
objective [63]. As a result, parameterless diversity preservation
was neglected in this study.
8

--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
Table 1
Summary of equations.
Description
Equation
No.
Total distance
∑Vr
vr =1 Dvr
(1)
Total waiting time
∑Vr
vr =1 Wvr
(2)
Number of vehicles used
∑Vr
v=1 yvr
(3)
Capacity violation VQvr
max(0, Qvr −Qv)
(4)
Duration violation Vdurvr
max(0, durvr −durv)
(5)
Time window violations VTWvr
∑
i∈vr (max(0, bi −li))
(6)
Total capacity violations VQVr
∑
vr ∈Vr VQvr
(7)
Total duration violations VdurVr
∑
vr ∈Vr Vdurvr
(8)
Total time window violations VTWVr
∑
vr ∈Vr VTWvr
(9)
Total penalised penalties PVr
PQ VQVr + Pdur VdurVr + PTW VTWvr
(10)
Overall objective vector
[PVr + ∑Vr
vr =1 Dvr , PVr + ∑Vr
vr =1 Wvr , PVr + ∑Vr
v=1 yvr ]
(11)
Individual fitness Indfitness
1 −
(RankInd−Rankmin)
(Rankmax−Rankmin)
(12)
Table 2
Tuned parameters.
Parameter
Description
Set value
PSize
Population size
100
Gen
Number of generations
150
Xrate
Crossover rate
80%
Mrate
Mutation rate
20%
LSrate
Greedy local search rate
10%
h
Generations to revisit the penalties
5
γ
Penalties multiply/divide factor
Uniform(1.5, 2.0)
–
Number of parallel experiments
10
3.4. Summary of mathematical equations
Based on the above derivation of mathematical equations,
Table 1 provides an overall summary of these equations as per
their order.
4. Computational results
In this section, the proposed centralised agent-based meta-
heuristic optimisation model is validated against the MDVRPTW
benchmark instances provided by Cordeau et al. [9]. It is found
that these instances are the nearest to the problem under study,
as other problem settings would not have direct comparison fac-
tors that suit the problem’s nature nor provide validated bench-
mark results for comparison. The proposed approach was first
tested on these instances towards initial verification, although
their solution approach minimises the travelled distance. In a
later study by Chiu et al. [11], they generated multiple criteria
from Cordeau et al. [9] work, including total travelled distance,
waiting times and the number of vehicles, and the results are
compared against them to ensure a fair multiple criteria compar-
ison study. In order to further show the model’s ability to solve
problems with unique vehicles’ attributes, modifications to these
instances are proposed. These modifications include randomi-
sations in vehicles’ start/end locations, capacities, and ending
shifts.
The evolutionary metaheuristic settings are mostly adapted
from Ghoseiri and Ghannadpour [62] since similar recombination
operators have been adapted; the number of runs, population
size, crossover and mutation rates. However, since our search
algorithm specifies a probability for an individual to undergo a
greedy local search rather than the education parameter from Vi-
dal et al. [76], the greedy search could emerge in better solutions
in fewer generations. Therefore, the number of generations is
significantly reduced to 150, as seen in Vidal et al. [76]. Additional
Table 3
Optimisation results on MDVRPTW instances; number of vehicles (V), total
travelled distance (TD) and total waiting time (WT).
Inst.
V
TD
WT
CPU (h)
pr01
6
1834.91
0
0.53
pr02
9
2654.15
1
2.41
pr03
13
3534
79
3.42
pr04
17
5276.27
23
4.94
pr05
22
4862.08
268
5.94
pr06
27
6180.17
90
6.63
pr07
7
2601.83
0
0.87
pr08
13
3990.9
92
2.97
pr09
18
5739.3
40
5.96
pr10
26
7187.03
26
6.85
pr11
4
1137.32
0
0.93
pr12
8
1972.7
0
2.26
pr13
11
2566.6
0
4.21
pr14
15
3251.16
0
6.21
pr15
19
3841.19
0
7.00
pr16
23
4395.81
28
8.02
pr17
6
1583.12
5
1.46
pr18
12
2964.17
0
4.20
pr19
16
3683.63
0
6.93
pr20
24
4881.18
14
8.43
constraint handling parameters, h and γ , for penalties update,
are set to 5 for h given its low sensitivity to the problem, as
proven in Gendreau et al. [64], while a random number between
1.5 and 2.0 for γ , as firstly implemented by Rochat and Semet
[65]. The experimental setting is repeated 10 times and ran in
parallel while the best arbitrary chosen non-dominated solu-
tion is reported per instance. The overall parameter settings are
summarised in Table 2.
The centralised agent-based model has been programmed in
Python, where each problem run is conducted on a single core
of an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Broadwell CPUs E5-2683 v4 @ 2.10 GHz
(32 CPU-cores/node) with the availability of 128 GB of RAM, the
multiple cores have been utilised to perform the experiments
in parallel. The outputs of solved instances include the three
objectives considered in the optimisation, the number of vehicles
(V), total travelled distance (TD) and total waiting time (WT). CPU
core times are also reported to show the time spent per run. The
model can also report the three constraints violations; however,
none has been reported under these settings.
4.1. Results on MDVRPTW benchmarks
The approach is tested on 20 MDVRPTW benchmark instances,
10 with tight customer time windows while the remaining are
with wider time windows. Table 3 summarises the results for all
9

--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
Table 4
Optimisation results on MDVRPTW instances compared to best known solutions; percent changes in number of vehicles (V%), total
travelled distance (TD%) and total waiting time (WT%).
Instance
V%
TD%
WT(Diff)
Cordeau
Chiu
Cordeau
Chiu
Cordeau
Chiu
pr01
−12.50%
16.67%
69.27%
19.09%
−602.10
−10.90
pr02
−16.67%
11.11%
50.54%
14.96%
−1128.04
−26.04
pr03
−12.50%
−6.67%
46.74%
9.68%
−2162.57
−13.27
pr04
0.00%
11.11%
78.36%
38.35%
−1813.62
−161.92
pr05
−4.35%
−4.35%
55.14%
9.14%
−1948.79
219.41
pr06
0.00%
0.00%
58.30%
22.41%
−2416.14
21.16
pr07
10.00%
37.50%
82.79%
34.25%
−1373.70
−8.90
pr08
−11.76%
7.14%
85.61%
36.18%
−2332.35
−29.25
pr09
0.00%
15.00%
102.53%
43.00%
−2648.39
−17.99
pr10
−3.45%
0.00%
93.35%
38.53%
−2737.60
−26.30
Avg
−5.12%
8.75%
72.26%
26.56%
−1916.33
−5.40
pr11
0.00%
0.00%
10.26%
−10.15%
−117.00
−9.90
pr12
0.00%
0.00%
31.47%
11.62%
−294.00
0.00
pr13
0.00%
0.00%
27.02%
0.46%
−311.80
0.00
pr14
0.00%
0.00%
44.68%
18.62%
−693.30
0.00
pr15
0.00%
0.00%
53.05%
21.46%
−713.70
0.00
pr16
−4.17%
−4.17%
49.32%
20.70%
−878.55
28.15
pr17
0.00%
0.00%
26.64%
−1.18%
−57.28
−1.48
pr18
0.00%
0.00%
63.82%
25.01%
−247.60
−9.40
pr19
−5.56%
−5.56%
59.40%
28.93%
−767.90
0.00
pr20
0.00%
0.00%
55.85%
19.70%
−732.21
2.49
Avg
−0.97%
−0.97%
42.15%
13.52%
−481.33
0.99
the instances. The CPU core times are highly dependent on the
problem size where it can go up to 6.85 h for tight time window
instances (pr01–10) and up to 8.43 h for wider time window
instances (pr11–20), which the increased solution space can be
explained with the widened time windows. Such high CPU times
are due to the extensive greedy local search of a high probable
selection of individuals. A selected sample of the resulted maps
with their routes is shown in Fig. 7, where a unique colour of arcs
represents a route on a map. A sample GA objectives improve-
ment run of instance pr05 is illustrated in Fig. 8, indicating no
more improvements were found after around generation 50 for
this particular instance run. It is worth mentioning that these evo-
lutionary generation charts update when the best non-dominated
solutions are found.
A comparison is needed to compare the model’s overall per-
formance in all the instances against the best-known results. It
is found that Chiu et al. [11] reported their heuristic, as well as
an adapted TS from Cordeau et al. [9], results against the three
objectives adopted in this study: vehicles used, total travelled
distance and total waiting time. They also reported the total
time, but it can be broken down into its original objectives:
distance and waiting time by adding them and the servicing
times of all customers if served. Since all customers have been
served in all cases, reporting the total time is neglected in this
paper. Chiu et al. [11] showed better waiting time values, reached
zero waiting times in some instances, and reduced the number
of vehicles used if they did not remain the same compared
to Cordeau et al. [9]. Table 4 compares this work’s results to Chiu
et al. [11] and Cordeau et al. [9]. Since waiting times can reach
zero, showing deviation percentage would not be informative
as divisions by zero could occur: therefore, the differences are
reports, however, with a ✓symbol indicating if our model’s result,
for instance, reached zero waiting time.
Based on the comparison table, the proposed approach gener-
ally managed to reduce the number of vehicles and total waiting
time in some instances, however, at the expense of the total
distance objective. Such behaviour is mainly explained by the
non-dominance search and sorting of the proposed approach
in selecting solutions by not favouring objectives over another,
contrary to previous approaches favouring only one objective,
distance or waiting time. For instance, with a tight time window,
an average reduction of 5.12% in the number of vehicles was
achieved only compared to Cordeau’s solutions, while it increased
by 8.75% for Chiu’s. The total distance travelled has significantly
increased compared to both solutions, with averages of 72.26%
and 26.56%. However, a significant reduction in waiting times
is shown compared to Cordeau’s with around 1900 time units
while, compared to Chiu’s, around five-time units reduction were
achieved given the total eradication of waiting times in instances
pr01 and pr07. A new record of reduced waiting times was
achieved in all tight time window instances except pr05 and pr06,
which skewed the average.
On the other hand, in wider time window instances, the num-
ber of vehicles was reduced by an average of around 1% compared
to both previous approaches, while the total distance travelled
was increased by 42.15% and 13.52%, respectively. Waiting times
have also been decreased significantly compared to Cordeau’s
solutions with an average of around 481-time units while a
very slight average increase of one-time unit compared to Chiu’s
despite the new record of waiting times in instances pr11, pr17
and pr18 where pr11 and pr18 waiting times have been eradi-
cated. It can be concluded that the proposed approach resulted
in better waiting times with an average reduction in all instances
of 2.21-time units.
4.2. Results on modified MDVRPTW benchmarks
Although the original 20 MDVRPTW benchmarks are the clos-
est to the problem under study, slight modifications to every
vehicle’s information are necessary to tackle the problem. Lo-
cations in these benchmarks were randomised initially using a
uniform distribution, where customer and depot locations should
be within [−100, 100]2 and [−50, 50]2 squares, respectively [77].
Since vehicles can be anywhere around the map, it is assumed
that their starting locations be within [−100, 100]2 square while
their unique depot is within [−50, 50]2 square. The capacity for
every vehicle is also randomised following a normal distribution,
rounded to the nearest integer, with a 10% deviation of the
instance’s original capacity Q . Furthermore, vehicle shifts are also
considered unique by randomly selecting their ending shift time
to be either at the entire shift or reduced by 25%.
10

--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
Fig. 7. Sample outputs for pr05 (top left), pr11 (top right) and pr16 (bottom).
Fig. 8. Pr05 GA run for each objective.
11

--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
Table 5
Modification scenarios to Cordeau’s instances.
Scenario
Change
Vehicles’ locations
Depots’ location
Capacities
Shifts
1
Location
Uniform dist [−100, 100]2
Uniform dist [−50, 50]2
Not changed
Not changed
2
Capacity
Not changed
Not changed
∼N(Q, 0.1Q )
Not changed
3
Shift
Not changed
Not changed
Not changed
Full or reduced
4
All
Uniform dist [−100, 100]2
Uniform dist [−50, 50]2
∼N(Q, 0.1Q )
Full or reduced
Fig. 9. Sample output for location modified pr11 instance.
Four scenarios are generated based on the way these changes
are applied. The first only randomises every vehicle and its home
depot locations. Capacities and shifts randomisations are individ-
ually applied in the following second and third scenarios, while
all modifications are applied in the fourth. The model’s results
generated in these scenarios are compared to the actual scenario
results from Table 3. Table 5 summarises the modifications.
Table 6 summarises the results of scenario 1, where vehicles’
locations are modified and their depots’. A sample solution map
of the location modified pr11 instance is shown in Fig. 9, where
vehicles’ starting node is blue, and their home depots are in grey.
Generally, it can be seen that there is an average increase in all
costs compared to the original scenario:
• Vehicles used increased by around 5% and 3% in tight and
wide time window instances.
• Total distance reduced by around 3% in tight time window
instances while increased by around 10% in the remaining
instances.
• Waiting times have increased by 16.85 and 1.05 of average
time units in the respective instances.
• CPU core times have been slightly increased with around 5%
and 2% increase.
Results of scenario 2, where every vehicle capacity is ran-
domised, are compared in Table 7 and summarised as follows:
• Vehicles have increased by around 7.84% and 3.16% in tight
and wide time window instances.
• Slight changes have resulted in the distance costs, with a
reduction of around 2% in tight time window instances and
an increase of around 3% in wide time window instances.
• Waiting times have increased in tight time window in-
stances with 44.64 average time units while the other in-
stances reduced by 3.66 average time units.
Table 6
Optimisation results on scenario 1; percent changes in number of vehicles (V%),
total travelled distance (TD%) and total waiting time (WT%).
Inst.
V%
TD%
WT(Diff)
CPU(s)
pr01
−16.67%
−14.36%
129.74
6.10%
pr02
0.00%
1.80%
38.87
−11.11%
pr03
7.69%
7.10%
16.56
19.15%
pr04
11.76%
−6.60%
45.82
0.07%
pr05
0.00%
4.90%
−154.27
−15.49%
pr06
3.70%
3.01%
57.50
−8.04%
pr07
14.29%
−8.46%
9.99
15.25%
pr08
7.69%
−1.67%
−5.91
31.11%
pr09
16.67%
−9.14%
−8.14
−0.93%
pr10
7.69%
−6.28%
38.32
14.01%
Avg
5.28%
−2.97%
16.85
5.01%
pr11
0.00%
22.57%
0.00
−0.71%
pr12
0.00%
0.29%
0.00
25.18%
pr13
9.09%
18.62%
2.13
14.30%
pr14
6.67%
20.17%
0.15
−16.27%
pr15
5.26%
9.66%
2.65
−2.63%
pr16
0.00%
8.83%
−0.67
−5.52%
pr17
0.00%
−6.02%
−5.32
23.32%
pr18
0.00%
5.99%
0.00
−1.01%
pr19
6.25%
8.62%
0.00
3.34%
pr20
0.00%
7.83%
11.53
−15.57%
Avg
2.73%
9.65%
1.05
2.44%
Table 7
Optimisation results on scenario 2; percent changes in number of vehicles (V%),
total travelled distance (TD%) and total waiting time (WT%).
Inst.
V%
TD%
WT(Diff)
CPU(s)
pr01
0.00%
−2.62%
46.15
0.88%
pr02
0.00%
−2.54%
60.87
−27.51%
pr03
7.69%
7.77%
−30.08
2.01%
pr04
11.76%
−4.63%
88.63
1.87%
pr05
0.00%
6.59%
43.83
10.08%
pr06
0.00%
−6.49%
42.09
−5.83%
pr07
28.57%
7.38%
0.00
9.76%
pr08
15.38%
−4.74%
−62.73
13.35%
pr09
11.11%
−9.93%
138.82
3.07%
pr10
3.85%
−9.45%
118.82
0.55%
Avg
7.84%
−1.87%
44.64
0.82%
pr11
0.00%
−0.62%
0.00
3.68%
pr12
0.00%
−6.48%
0.00
23.24%
pr13
9.09%
16.66%
2.70
3.64%
pr14
6.67%
0.67%
0.00
3.88%
pr15
5.26%
−0.43%
2.60
11.91%
pr16
4.35%
3.83%
−28.15
5.75%
pr17
0.00%
5.60%
−5.32
10.14%
pr18
0.00%
−1.38%
0.00
12.91%
pr19
6.25%
−8.38%
0.00
4.89%
pr20
0.00%
16.66%
−8.45
5.63%
Avg
3.16%
2.61%
−3.66
8.57%
• There is a negligible average increase, less than 1%, in CPU
times in the tight time window instances, while a noticeable
increase of 8.57% is shown in the remaining instances.
Table 8 summarises the compared results of scenario 3, where
every vehicle shift is either at full shift or reduced to a shorter
one. As a general insight:
12

--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
Table 8
Optimisation results on scenario 3; percent changes in number of vehicles (V%),
total travelled distance (TD%) and total waiting time (WT%).
Inst.
V%
TD%
WT(Diff)
CPU(s)
pr01
−16.67%
−15.44%
54.23
10.17%
pr02
11.11%
7.02%
14.08
−10.47%
pr03
0.00%
5.52%
−47.96
−0.79%
pr04
5.88%
−22.47%
154.14
−4.98%
pr05
4.55%
14.74%
−130.01
0.88%
pr06
3.70%
4.82%
−29.36
9.28%
pr07
28.57%
−4.79%
61.93
0.72%
pr08
15.38%
−3.49%
−12.90
14.22%
pr09
16.67%
−0.51%
76.18
−2.70%
pr10
7.69%
−10.05%
54.25
5.56%
Avg
7.69%
−2.46%
19.46
2.19%
pr11
0.00%
4.87%
0.00
11.37%
pr12
0.00%
−4.75%
0.00
4.05%
pr13
9.09%
19.01%
0.00
−7.71%
pr14
6.67%
4.10%
0.00
0.42%
pr15
5.26%
−2.97%
0.91
8.28%
pr16
4.35%
−7.60%
−27.20
19.05%
pr17
0.00%
1.54%
−5.32
18.86%
pr18
0.00%
−6.67%
0.00
−7.72%
pr19
6.25%
−3.42%
0.00
−4.60%
pr20
0.00%
6.27%
−9.05
4.48%
Avg
3.16%
1.04%
−4.07
4.65%
Table 9
Optimisation results on scenario 4; percent changes in number of vehicles (V%),
total travelled distance (TD%) and total waiting time (WT%).
Inst.
V%
TD%
WT(Diff)
CPU(s)
pr01
−16.67%
−19.19%
81.50
9.77%
pr02
0.00%
−5.41%
28.25
−19.49%
pr03
15.38%
11.16%
−31.13
−0.84%
pr04
5.88%
−13.47%
74.85
−17.20%
pr05
9.09%
17.66%
−61.43
−17.71%
pr06
3.70%
4.55%
175.82
−12.60%
pr07
28.57%
0.96%
34.08
2.73%
pr08
7.69%
−10.79%
−5.53
4.99%
pr09
11.11%
−9.10%
126.94
−7.94%
pr10
3.85%
−11.57%
153.40
−7.78%
Avg
6.86%
−3.52%
57.68
−6.61%
pr11
0.00%
17.14%
1.61
3.63%
pr12
0.00%
1.84%
0.00
12.51%
pr13
9.09%
25.94%
3.00
−11.54%
pr14
6.67%
6.16%
18.83
−22.21%
pr15
5.26%
18.17%
22.97
−19.77%
pr16
4.35%
24.89%
7.93
−17.05%
pr17
0.00%
1.94%
−5.32
8.70%
pr18
0.00%
6.19%
0.00
15.55%
pr19
6.25%
2.92%
0.67
−11.83%
pr20
0.00%
14.92%
11.45
−23.50%
Avg
3.16%
12.01%
6.11
−6.55%
• Similar behaviour to scenario 2 is noticed with more vehi-
cles being utilised and increased by 7.69% and 3.16% in tight
and wide time window instances, respectively.
• Minor changes resulted in the total distances, which were
reduced by 2.46% in tight time window instances and in-
creased by around 1% in wide time window instances.
• Waiting times have increased in tight time window in-
stances with a 19.46 average time units and reduced by 4.07
average time units in the remaining instances.
• An increase in CPU times with around a 2% and 5% increase
in both instances.
Finally, the last scenario’s compared results are shown in
Table 9, where all previous problem modifications are considered
at once. In general, the behaviour is similar to the changes shown
in scenarios 2 & 3 and summarised as follows:
• The number of vehicles objective has shown nearly identical
behaviour in all previous instances, with an increase of
around 7% and 3% in both problem types, respectively.
• Minor changes in the total distance in tight time window
instances with around a 4% decrease and a significant in-
crease in distance in wider time window instances with a
12% increase.
• Waiting times have significantly increased in tight time
window instances with 57.68 average time units and an
increase of 6.11 average time units in waiting times of wider
time window instances.
• Noticeable changes can be seen in CPU times which de-
creased by around 7% in both problem types.
5. Conclusion
This paper studied the VRPTW problem with a different per-
spective on the heterogeneity of the vehicles that considers differ-
ent start/end locations, capacities as well as operating shifts. The
adopted agent-based modelling approach captured this heteroge-
neous problem by proposing an architecture that initiates unique
instances of vehicles that represented the problem under study.
The proposed architecture, including integrating its core mod-
ules, successfully emerged appropriate solutions to the unique
VRP under study. The proposed architecture managed centralised
agent cooperation in solution evaluation and variations. With
the aid of a proposed evolutionary metaheuristic framework,
the problem is solved by minimising three objectives with the
necessary multi-objective components. The model resulted in
routes with around 1200 and 2 average time units less in waiting
times than Cordeau’s and Chiu’s solutions of MDVRPTW instances.
However, lower waiting times came at the expense of the other
objectives, mainly the total travelled distance. It increased by
around 57% in Cordeau’s and 20% in Chiu’s. Adopting of the
dominance-based sorting technique in solutions comparison has
prevented previous approaches from compromising the waiting
times objective by not favouring any of the objectives. MDVRPTW
instances are modified to encapsulate the problem under study
by randomising locations, capacities and shifts. As a result, four
additional scenarios are created: three of which apply each of
the changes individually, while the fourth where all are applied.
Further experiments were conducted on these scenarios, and the
results were compared with the model’s output on the original
instances and showed costly deviations in all the objectives.
Future research, creating new and generalised benchmarks or
systematically modifying existing ones, is needed to capture such
practical scenarios by adopting different levels of each of the
modifying factors. Further work can include studying additional
problem variants, such as pickup and delivery and dynamic VRP,
to be compatible with the proposed agent-based problem model.
Furthermore, systematic parametric experimentation is needed to
find the tuned parameters of the metaheuristic for the problem
under study and more experimentation with a combination of the
metaheuristic components to suitably find the best algorithm to
aid the search for this agent-based model.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Anees Abu-Monshar: Conceptualization, Methodology, Soft-
ware, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation,
Writing – original draft, Visualization. Ammar Al-Bazi: Writing
– review & editing, Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan-
cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to influence the work reported in this paper.
13

--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
References
[1] G.B. Dantzig, J.H. Ramser, The truck dispatching problem, Manage. Sci. 6
(1) (1959) 80–91, ISBN: 0025-1909.
[2] K. Braekers, K. Ramaekers, I. Van Nieuwenhuyse, The vehicle routing
problem: State of the art classification and review, Comput. Ind. Eng. 99
(2016) 300–313.
[3] J.K. Lenstra, A.H.G. Rinnooy Kan, Complexity of vehicle routing and
scheduling problems, Networks 11 (2) (1981) 221–227.
[4] G. Laporte, Fifty years of vehicle routing, Transp. Sci. 43 (4) (2009)
408–416, ISBN: 0041-1655.
[5] T.V. Le, A. Stathopoulos, T. Van Woensel, S.V. Ukkusuri, Supply, demand,
operations, and management of crowd-shipping services: A review and
empirical evidence, Transp. Res. C 103 (2019) 83–103.
[6] K. Schopka, H. Kopfer, An adaptive large neighborhood search for the
reverse open vehicle routing problem with time windows, in: D. Mattfeld,
T. Spengler, J. Brinkmann, M. Grunewald (Eds.), Logistics Management,
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2016, pp. 243–257, Series Title:
Lecture Notes in Logistics.
[7] A. Goel, V. Gruhn, A general vehicle routing problem, European J. Oper.
Res. 191 (3) (2008) 650–660.
[8] A. Goel, A column generation heuristic for the general vehicle routing
problem, in: D. Hutchison, T. Kanade, J. Kittler, J.M. Kleinberg, F. Mattern,
J.C. Mitchell, M. Naor, O. Nierstrasz, C. Pandu Rangan, B. Steffen, M.
Sudan, D. Terzopoulos, D. Tygar, M.Y. Vardi, G. Weikum, C. Blum, R. Battiti
(Eds.), Learning and Intelligent Optimization, vol. 6073, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 1–9.
[9] J.-F. Cordeau, G. Laporte, A. Mercier, A unified tabu search heuristic for
vehicle routing problems with time windows, J. Oper. Res. Soc. 52 (8)
(2001) 928–936.
[10] P.P. Repoussis, C.D. Tarantilis, G. Ioannou, The open vehicle routing
problem with time windows, J. Oper. Res. Soc. 58 (3) (2007) 355–367.
[11] H.N. Chiu, Y.S. Lee, J.H. Chang, Two approaches to solving the multi-depot
vehicle routing problem with time windows in a time-based logistics
environment, Prod. Plan. Control 17 (5) (2006) 480–493.
[12] C.-J. Ting, C.-H. Chen, Combination of multiple ant colony system and
simulated annealing for the multidepot vehicle-routing problem with time
windows, Transp. Res. Rec.: J. Transp. Res. Board 2089 (1) (2008) 85–92.
[13] T. Weise, A. Podlich, C. Gorldt, Solving real-world vehicle routing problems
with evolutionary algorithms, in: J. Kacprzyk, R. Chiong, S. Dhakal (Eds.),
Natural Intelligence for Scheduling, Planning and Packing Problems, Vol.
250, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 29–53.
[14] A. Bettinelli, A. Ceselli, G. Righini, A branch-and-cut-and-price algorithm
for the multi-depot heterogeneous vehicle routing problem with time
windows, Transp. Res. C 19 (5) (2011) 723–740.
[15] J. Luo, M.-R. Chen, Improved shuffled frog leaping algorithm and its multi-
phase model for multi-depot vehicle routing problem, Expert Syst. Appl.
41 (5) (2014) 2535–2545.
[16] I. Dayarian, T.G. Crainic, M. Gendreau, W. Rei, A column generation
approach for a multi-attribute vehicle routing problem, European J. Oper.
Res. 241 (3) (2015) 888–906.
[17] R. Cantu-Funes, M.A. Salazar-Aguilar, V. Boyer, Multi-depot periodic vehicle
routing problem with due dates and time windows, J. Oper. Res. Soc. 69
(2) (2018) 296–306.
[18] M. Maischberger, J.-F. Cordeau, Solving variants of the vehicle routing
problem with a simple parallel iterated tabu search, in: J. Pahl, T. Reiners,
S. Voß (Eds.), Network Optimization, Vol. 6701, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 395–400.
[19] Y. Xu, W. Jiang, An improved variable neighborhood search algorithm
for multi depot heterogeneous vehicle routing problem based on hybrid
operators, Int. J. Control Autom. 7 (3) (2014) 299–316.
[20] J. Wang, T. Weng, Q. Zhang, A two-stage multiobjective evolutionary
algorithm for multiobjective multidepot vehicle routing problem with time
windows, IEEE Trans. Cybern.
49 (7) (2019) 2467–2478.
[21] M.E.H. Sadati, B. Çatay, D. Aksen, An efficient variable neighborhood search
with tabu shaking for a class of multi-depot vehicle routing problems,
Comput. Oper. Res. 133 (2021) 105269.
[22] U.S.S. Dharmapriya, S.B. Siyambalapitiya, A.K. Kulatunga, Artificial intelli-
gence computational techniques to optimize a multi objective oriented
distribution operations, in: Proceedings of the 2010 International Con-
ference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management, Dhaka,
Bangladesh, 2010.
[23] M. Adelzadeh, V. Mahdavi Asl, M. Koosha, A mathematical model and a
solving procedure for multi-depot vehicle routing problem with fuzzy time
window and heterogeneous vehicle, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 75 (5–8)
(2014) 793–802.
[24] F. Cornillier, F. Boctor, J. Renaud, Heuristics for the multi-depot petrol
station replenishment problem with time windows, European J. Oper. Res.
220 (2) (2012) 361–369.
[25] B. Afshar-Nadjafi, A. Afshar-Nadjafi, Multi-depot time dependent vehicle
routing problem with heterogeneous fleet and time windows, Int. J. Oper.
Res. 26 (1) (2016) 88.
[26] B. Afshar-Nadjafi, A. Afshar-Nadjafi, A constructive heuristic for time-
dependent multi-depot vehicle routing problem with time-windows and
heterogeneous fleet, J. King Saud Univ., Eng. Sci. 29 (1) (2017) 29–34.
[27] J. Li, Y. Li, P.M. Pardalos, Multi-depot vehicle routing problem with time
windows under shared depot resources, J. Combin. Optim. 31 (2) (2016)
515–532.
[28] L. Zhen, C. Ma, K. Wang, L. Xiao, W. Zhang, Multi-depot multi-trip vehicle
routing problem with time windows and release dates, Transp. Res. E 135
(2020) 101866.
[29] M.H.F.
Zarandi,
A.
Hemmati,
S.
Davari,
The
multi-depot
capacitated
location-routing problem with fuzzy travel times, Expert Syst. Appl. 38
(8) (2011) 10075–10084.
[30] P. Flisberg, B. Lidén, M. Rönnqvist, A hybrid method based on linear
programming and tabu search for routing of logging trucks, Comput. Oper.
Res. 36 (4) (2009) 1122–1144.
[31] P. Sombuntham, V. Kachitvichyanukul, S.-I. Ao, H. Katagir, L. Xu, A.H.-
S. Chan, Multi-depot vehicle routing problem with pickup and delivery
requests, in: AIP Conference Proceedings of the International MultiConfer-
ence of Engineers and Computer Scientists, Vol. 1285, Hong Kong, (China),
2010, pp. 71–85.
[32] R. Kramer, J.-F. Cordeau, M. Iori, Rich vehicle routing with auxiliary depots
and anticipated deliveries: An application to pharmaceutical distribution,
Transp. Res. E 129 (2019) 162–174.
[33] J.J. Alcaraz, L. Caballero-Arnaldos, J. Vales-Alonso, Rich vehicle routing
problem with last-mile outsourcing decisions, Transp. Res. E 129 (2019)
263–286.
[34] N. Norouzi, R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, M. Ghazanfari, M. Alinaghian, A.
Salamatbakhsh, A new multi-objective competitive open vehicle routing
problem solved by particle swarm optimization, Netw. Spat. Econ. 12 (4)
(2012) 609–633.
[35] J. Brito, F. Martínez, J. Moreno, J. Verdegay, An ACO hybrid metaheuristic
for close–open vehicle routing problems with time windows and fuzzy
constraints, Appl. Soft Comput. 32 (2015) 154–163.
[36] Y. Xia, Z. Fu, Improved tabu search algorithm for the open vehicle routing
problem with soft time windows and satisfaction rate, Cluster Comput. 22
(S4) (2019) 8725–8733.
[37] J. Brandão, Iterated local search algorithm with ejection chains for the
open vehicle routing problem with time windows, Comput. Ind. Eng. 120
(2018) 146–159.
[38] S. Hashemi, M. Salari, M. Ranjbar, Multi-trip open vehicle routing problem
with time windows: A case study, Int. J. Ind. Eng.: Theory, Appl. Pract. 27
(1) (2020) Number: 1.
[39] N.K. Yu, W. Jiang, R. Hu, B. Qian, L. Wang, Learning whale optimization
algorithm for open vehicle routing problem with loading constraints,
Discrete Dyn. Nat. Soc. 2021 (2021) e8016356, Publisher: Hindawi.
[40] Y. Niu, Z. Yang, P. Chen, J. Xiao, Optimizing the green open vehicle routing
problem with time windows by minimizing comprehensive routing cost,
J. Cleaner Prod. 171 (2018) 962–971.
[41] L. Shen, F. Tao, S. Wang, Multi-depot open vehicle routing problem with
time windows based on carbon trading, Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health
15 (9) (2018) 2025.
[42] M. Babagolzadeh, A. Shrestha, B. Abbasi, S. Zhang, R. Atefi, A. Woodhead,
Sustainable open vehicle routing with release-time and time-window:
A two-echelon distribution system, IFAC-PapersOnLine 52 (13) (2019)
571–576.
[43] A. Rahmani, A new closed–open vehicle routing approach in stochastic
environments, Int. J. Comput. Math.: Comput. Syst. Theory (2020) 1–17.
[44] A. Abu-Monshar, A. Al-Bazi, V. Palade, An agent-based optimisation ap-
proach for vehicle routing problem with unique vehicle location and depot,
Expert Syst. Appl. 192 (2022) 116370.
[45] M. Barbati, G. Bruno, A. Genovese, Applications of agent-based models for
optimization problems: A literature review, 2012, pp. 6020–6028.
[46] L. Monostori, J. Váncza, S. Kumara, Agent-based systems for manufacturing,
55, 2006, 697–720.
[47] M. Mes, M. van der Heijden, A. van Harten, Comparison of agent-based
scheduling to look-ahead heuristics for real-time transportation problems,
European J. Oper. Res. 181 (1) (2007) 59–75.
[48] D. Barbucha, Agent-based guided local search, Expert Syst. Appl. 39 (15)
(2012) 12032–12045.
[49] D. Barbucha, Multi-agent approach to the DVRP with GLS improvement
procedure, in: I. Czarnowski, R.J. Howlett, L.C. Jain (Eds.), Intelligent
Decision Technologies, in: Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies,
Springer, Singapore, 2020, pp. 117–126.
14

--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
A. Abu-Monshar and A. Al-Bazi
Applied Soft Computing 125 (2022) 109187
[50] D. Barbucha, Experimental study of the population parameters settings
in cooperative multi-agent system solving instances of the VRP, in: N.T.
Nguyen (Ed.), Transactions on Computational Collective Intelligence IX, Vol.
7770, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 1–28.
[51] J. Vokřínek, A. Komenda, M. Echouek, Agents towards vehicle routing prob-
lems, in: Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems, International Foundation for Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2010, pp. 773–780.
[52] M.M. Solomon, Algorithms for the vehicle routing and scheduling problems
with time window constraints, Oper. Res. 35 (2) (1987) 254–265.
[53] P. Kalina, J. Vokřínek, Parallel solver for vehicle routing and pickup and
delivery problems with time windows based on agent negotiation, in: 2012
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC),
2012, pp. 1558–1563.
[54] S. Martin, D. Ouelhadj, P. Beullens, E. Ozcan, A.A. Juan, E.K. Burke, A multi-
agent based cooperative approach to scheduling and routing, European J.
Oper. Res. 254 (1) (2016) 169–178.
[55] P. Davidsson, J.A. Persson, J. Holmgren, On the integration of agent-based
and mathematical optimization techniques, in: N.T. Nguyen, A. Grzech, R.J.
Howlett, L.C. Jain (Eds.), Agent and Multi-Agent Systems: Technologies and
Applications, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4496, Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 1–10.
[56] F. Glover, Future paths for integer programming and links to artificial
intelligence, 13, 1986, 533–549.
[57] E.-G. Talbi, Metaheuristics: From Design to Implementation, John Wiley &
Sons, 2009.
[58] B.E. Gillett, L.R. Miller, A heuristic algorithm for the vehicle-dispatch
problem, Oper. Res. 22 (2) (1974) 340–349, Pages: 340-349 Publication
Title: Operations Research Volume: 22.
[59] N. Christofides, A. Mingozzi, P. Toth, The vehicle routing problem, in:
N. Christofides, A. Mingozzi, P. Toth, C. Sandi (Eds.), Combinatorial
Optimization, Wiley, Chichester, 1979, pp. 315–338.
[60] Z. Michalewicz, Genetic Algorithms + Data Structures=Evolution Programs,
3rd rev. and extended ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin ; New York, 1996.
[61] T. Bektas, The multiple traveling salesman problem: an overview of
formulations and solution procedures, Omega 34 (3) (2006) 209–219.
[62] K. Ghoseiri, S.F. Ghannadpour, Multi-objective vehicle routing problem
with time windows using goal programming and genetic algorithm, Appl.
Soft Comput. 10 (4) (2010) 1096–1107.
[63] B.M. Ombuki, B.J. Ross, F. Hanshar, Multi-objective genetic algorithms for
vehicle routing problem with time windows, Appl. Intell. 24 (1) (2006)
17–30.
[64] M. Gendreau, a. Hertz, G. Laporte, A tabu search heuristic for the vehicle
routing problem, Manage. Sci. 40 (10) (1994) 1276–1290, arXiv:1405.
7020v1 ISBN: 9780387236674.
[65] Y. Rochat, F. Semet, A tabu search approach for delivering pet food and
flour in Switzerland, J. Oper. Res. Soc. 45 (11) (1994) 1233–1246.
[66] G. Laporte, F. Semet, 5. Classical Heuristics for the capacitated VRP, in:
The Vehicle Routing Problem, in: Discrete Mathematics and Applications,
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2002, pp. 109–128.
[67] I. Or, Traveling Salesman-Type Combinatorial Optimization Problems and
Their Relation to the Logistics of Regional Blood Banking (Ph.D. the-
sis), Department of Industrial Engineering and Management Sciences
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, 1976.
[68] E. Taillard, P. Badeau, M. Gendreau, F. Geurtin, J.Y. Potvin, A tabu search
heuristic for the vehicle routing problem with soft time windows, Transp.
Sci. 31 (November 2016) (1997) 170–186.
[69] J.-Y. Potvin, S. Bengio, The vehicle routing problem with time windows Part
II: Genetic search, INFORMS J. Comput. 8 (2) (1996) 165–172, Publisher:
INFORMS.
[70] B.M. Ombuki, M. Nakamura, M. Osamu, A hybrid search based on genetic
algorithms and tabu search for vehicle routing, in: 6th IASTED Intl. Conf. on
Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing (ASC 2002), 2002, pp. 176–181.
[71] K. Sörensen, Metaheuristics-the metaphor exposed, Int. Trans. Oper. Res.
22 (1) (2015) 3–18.
[72] J.R. Montoya-Torres, J. López Franco, S. Nieto Isaza, H. Felizzola Jiménez,
N. Herazo-Padilla, A literature review on the vehicle routing problem with
multiple depots, Comput. Ind. Eng. 79 (2015) 115–129.
[73] R. Elshaer, H. Awad, A taxonomic review of metaheuristic algorithms for
solving the vehicle routing problem and its variants, Comput. Ind. Eng. 140
(2020) 106242.
[74] N.
Jozefowiez,
F.
Semet,
E.-G.
Talbi,
Multi-objective
vehicle
routing
problems, European J. Oper. Res. 189 (2) (2008) 293–309.
[75] J. Holland, Adaptation in Artificial and Natural Systems, The University of
Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, 1975, p. 232.
[76] T. Vidal, T.G. Crainic, M. Gendreau, N. Lahrichi, W. Rei, A hybrid genetic
algorithm for multidepot and periodic vehicle routing problems, Oper. Res.
60 (3) (2012) 611–624.
[77] J.-F. Cordeau, M. Gendreau, G. Laporte, A tabu search heuristic for peri-
odic and multi-depot vehicle routing problems, Networks 30 (2) (1997)
105–119.
Anees Abu-Monshar is currently a PhD candidate in simulation and optimisation
of logistics systems at Coventry University, UK. He received his M.Sc. in
Engineering Business Management from the same University while his B.Sc. in
Industrial Engineering from the German Jordanian University, Amman, Jordan.
He was engaged in an industrial experience by modelling a sub-assembly line
at Jaguar Land Rover. His research interests include agent-based modelling,
logistics, transportation and optimisation.
Ammar Al-Bazi is a Senior Lecturer in Business Information Systems in the
Faculty of Engineering, Environment and Computing and an associate member
of the Manufacturing and Materials Engineering Research Centre at Coventry
University, UK. He holds a PhD in computer simulation and optimisation
from Teesside University, UK. His research interests include hybrid simulation
modelling, manufacturing and logistics simulation, metaheuristic optimisation
algorithms and hybrid intelligent systems.
15
